Device that measures proper acceleration An accelerometer is a device that measures the proper acceleration of an object.  1  Proper acceleration is the acceleration the rate of change of velocity  of the object relative to an observer who is in free fall that is relative to an inertial frame of reference .  2  Proper acceleration is different from coordinate acceleration which is acceleration with respect to a given coordinate system  which may or may not be accelerating. For example an accelerometer at rest on the surface of the Earth will measure an acceleration due to Earths gravity straight upwards  3  of about g  9.81 ms 2 . By contrast an accelerometer that is in free fall will measure zero acceleration. Accelerometers have many uses in industry consumer products and science. Highly sensitive accelerometers are used in inertial navigation systems for aircraft and missiles. In unmanned aerial vehicles  accelerometers help to stabilize flight. Micromachined microelectromechanical systems MEMS accelerometers are used in handheld electronic devices such as smartphones  cameras and videogame controllers to detect movement and orientation of these devices. Vibration in industrial machinery is monitored by accelerometers. Seismometers are sensitive accelerometers for monitoring ground movement such as earthquakes. An accelerometer When two or more accelerometers are coordinated with one another they can measure differences in proper acceleration particularly gravity over their separation in spacethat is the gradient of the gravitational field . Gravity gradiometry is useful because absolute gravity is a weak effect and depends on the local density of the Earth which is quite variable. A singleaxis accelerometer measures acceleration along a specified axis. A multiaxis accelerometer detects both the magnitude and the direction of the proper acceleration as a vector quantity and is usually implemented as several singleaxis accelerometers oriented along different axes. Physical principles  edit  An accelerometer measures proper acceleration  which is the acceleration it experiences relative to freefall and is the acceleration felt by people and objects.  2  Put another way at any point in spacetime the equivalence principle guarantees the existence of a local inertial frame  and an accelerometer measures the acceleration relative to that frame.  4  Such accelerations are popularly denoted gforce  i.e. in comparison to standard gravity . An accelerometer at rest relative to the Earths surface will indicate approximately 1 g upwards because the Earths surface exerts a normal force upwards relative to the local inertial frame the frame of a freely falling object near the surface. To obtain the acceleration due to motion with respect to the Earth this gravity offset must be subtracted and corrections made for effects caused by the Earths rotation relative to the inertial frame. The reason for the appearance of a gravitational offset is Einsteins equivalence principle   5  which states that the effects of gravity on an object are indistinguishable from acceleration. When held fixed in a gravitational field by for example applying a ground reaction force or an equivalent upward thrust the reference frame for an accelerometer its own casing accelerates upwards with respect to a freefalling reference frame. The effects of this acceleration are indistinguishable from any other acceleration experienced by the instrument so that an accelerometer cannot detect the difference between sitting in a rocket on the launch pad and being in the same rocket in deep space while it uses its engines to accelerate at 1 g. For similar reasons an accelerometer will read zero during any type of free fall . This includes use in a coasting spaceship in deep space far from any mass a spaceship orbiting the Earth an airplane in a parabolic zerog arc or any freefall in a vacuum. Another example is freefall at a sufficiently high altitude that atmospheric effects can be neglected. However this does not include a nonfree fall in which air resistance produces drag forces that reduce the acceleration until constant terminal velocity is reached. At terminal velocity the accelerometer will indicate 1 g acceleration upwards. For the same reason a skydiver  upon reaching terminal velocity does not feel as though he or she were in freefall but rather experiences a feeling similar to being supported at 1 g on a bed of uprushing air. Acceleration is quantified in the SI unit metres per second per second ms 2  in the cgs unit gal Gal or popularly in terms of standard gravity  g . For the practical purpose of finding the acceleration of objects with respect to the Earth such as for use in an inertial navigation system  a knowledge of local gravity is required. This can be obtained either by calibrating the device at rest  6  or from a known model of gravity at the approximate current position. Structure  edit  This section needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources Accelerometer  news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR  April 2024   Learn how and when to remove this message  A basic mechanical accelerometer is a damped proof mass on a spring . When the accelerometer experiences an acceleration Newtons third law causes the springs compression to adjust to exert an equivalent force on the mass to counteract the acceleration. Since the springs force scales linearly with amount of compression according to Hookes law  and because the spring constant and mass are known constants a measurement of the springs compression is also a measurement of acceleration. The system is damped to prevent oscillations of the mass and spring interfering with measurements. However the damping causes accelerometers to have a frequency response . Many animals have sensory organs to detect acceleration especially gravity. In these the proof mass is usually one or more crystals of calcium carbonate otoliths Latin for ear stone or statoconia  acting against a bed of hairs connected to neurons. The hairs form the springs with the neurons as sensors. The damping is usually by a fluid. Many vertebrates including humans have these structures in their inner ears. Most invertebrates have similar organs but not as part of their hearing organs. These are called statocysts . Mechanical accelerometers are often designed so that an electronic circuit senses a small amount of motion then pushes on the proof mass with some type of linear motor to keep the proof mass from moving far. The motor might be an electromagnet or in very small accelerometers electrostatic . Since the circuits electronic behavior can be carefully designed and the proof mass does not move far these designs can be very stable i.e. they do not oscillate  very linear with a controlled frequency response. This is called servo mode design. In mechanical accelerometers measurement is often electrical piezoelectric  piezoresistive or capacitive . Piezoelectric accelerometers use piezoceramic sensors e.g. lead zirconate titanate  or single crystals e.g. quartz  tourmaline . They are unmatched in high frequency measurements low packaged weight and resistance to high temperatures. Piezoresistive accelerometers resist shock very high accelerations better. Capacitive accelerometers typically use a silicon micromachined sensing element. They measure low frequencies well. Modern mechanical accelerometers are often small microelectromechanical systems  MEMS  and are often very simple MEMS devices consisting of little more than a cantilever beam with a proof mass also known as seismic mass . Damping results from the residual gas sealed in the device. As long as the Qfactor is not too low damping does not result in a lower sensitivity. Under the influence of external accelerations the proof mass deflects from its neutral position.  This deflection is measured in an analog or digital manner. Most commonly the capacitance between a set of fixed beams and a set of beams attached to the proof mass is measured. This method is simple reliable and inexpensive. Integrating piezoresistors in the springs to detect spring deformation and thus deflection is a good alternative although a few more process steps are needed during the fabrication sequence. For very high sensitivities quantum tunnelling is also used this requires a dedicated process making it very expensive. Optical measurement has been demonstrated in laboratory devices. Another MEMSbased accelerometer is a thermal or convective  accelerometer.  7  It contains a small heater in a very small dome. This heats the air or other fluid inside the dome. The thermal bubble acts as the proof mass . An accompanying temperature sensor like a thermistor  or thermopile  in the dome measures the temperature in one location of the dome. This measures the location of the heated bubble within the dome. When the dome is accelerated the colder higher density fluid pushes the heated bubble. The measured temperature changes. The temperature measurement is interpreted as acceleration. The fluid provides the damping. Gravity acting on the fluid provides the spring. Since the proof mass is very lightweight gas and not held by a beam or lever thermal accelerometers can survive high shocks . Another variation uses a wire to both heat the gas and detect the change in temperature. The change of temperature changes the resistance of the wire. A two dimensional accelerometer can be economically constructed with one dome one bubble and two measurement devices. Most micromechanical accelerometers operate inplane  that is they are designed to be sensitive only to a direction in the plane of the die . By integrating two devices perpendicularly on a single die a twoaxis accelerometer can be made. By adding another outofplane device three axes can be measured. Such a combination may have much lower misalignment error than three discrete models combined after packaging. Micromechanical accelerometers are available in a wide variety of measuring ranges reaching up to thousands of g  s. The designer must compromise between sensitivity and the maximum acceleration that can be measured. Applications  edit  Engineering  edit  Accelerometers can be used to measure vehicle acceleration.
Accelerometers can be used to measure vibration on cars machines buildings process control systems and safety installations. They can also be used to measure seismic activity  inclination machine vibration dynamic distance and speed with or without the influence of gravity. Applications for accelerometers that measure gravity wherein an accelerometer is specifically configured for use in gravimetry  are called gravimeters . Biology  edit  Accelerometers are also increasingly used in the biological sciences. High frequency recordings of biaxial  8  or triaxial acceleration  9  allows the discrimination of behavioral patterns while animals are out of sight. Furthermore recordings of acceleration allow researchers to quantify the rate at which an animal is expending energy in the wild by either determination of limbstroke frequency  10  or measures such as overall dynamic body acceleration  11  Such approaches have mostly been adopted by marine scientists due to an inability to study animals in the wild using visual observations however an increasing number of terrestrial biologists are adopting similar approaches. For example accelerometers have been used to study flight energy expenditure of Harriss Hawk  Parabuteo unicinctus .  12  Researchers are also using smartphone accelerometers to collect and extract mechanobiological descriptors of resistance exercise.  13  Increasingly researchers are deploying accelerometers with additional technology such as cameras or microphones to better understand animal behaviour in the wild for example hunting behaviour of Canada lynx  14  . Industry  edit  Main article Condition monitoring Accelerometers are also used for machinery health monitoring to report the vibration and its changes in time of shafts at the bearings of rotating equipment such as turbines pumps   15  fans  16  rollers  17  compressors   18   19  or bearing fault  20  which if not attended to promptly can lead to costly repairs. Accelerometer vibration data allows the user to monitor machines and detect these faults before the rotating equipment fails completely. Building and structural monitoring  edit  This section does not cite any sources . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .  November 2019   Learn how and when to remove this message  Accelerometers are used to measure the motion and vibration of a structure that is exposed to dynamic loads. Dynamic loads originate from a variety of sources including Human activities  walking running dancing or skipping Working machines  inside a building or in the surrounding area Construction work  driving piles demolition drilling and excavating Moving loads on bridges Vehicle collisions Impact loads  falling debris Concussion loads  internal and external explosions Collapse of structural elements Wind loads and wind gusts Air blast pressure Loss of support because of ground failure Earthquakes and aftershocks Under structural applications measuring and recording how a structure dynamically responds to these inputs is critical for assessing the safety and viability of a structure. This type of monitoring is called Health Monitoring which usually involves other types of instruments such as displacement sensors Potentiometers LVDTs etc. deformation sensors Strain Gauges Extensometers load sensors Load Cells PiezoElectric Sensors among others. Medical applications  edit  Zolls AED Plus uses CPRDpadz which contain an accelerometer to measure the depth of CPR chest compressions. Within the last several years several companies have produced and marketed sports watches for runners that include footpods  containing accelerometers to help determine the speed and distance for the runner wearing the unit. In Belgium accelerometerbased step counters are promoted by the government to encourage people to walk a few thousand steps each day. Herman Digital Trainer uses accelerometers to measure strike force in physical training.  21   22  It has been suggested to build football helmets with accelerometers in order to measure the impact of head collisions.  23  Accelerometers have been used to calculate gait parameters  such as stance and swing phase. This kind of sensor can be used to measure or monitor people.  24   25  Navigation  edit  Main article Inertial navigation system An inertial navigation system is a navigation aid that uses a computer and motion sensors accelerometers to continuously calculate via dead reckoning the position orientation and velocity direction and speed of movement of a moving object without the need for external references. Other terms used to refer to inertial navigation systems or closely related devices include inertial guidance system inertial reference platform and many other variations. An accelerometer alone is unsuitable to determine changes in altitude over distances where the vertical decrease of gravity is significant such as for aircraft and rockets. In the presence of a gravitational gradient the calibration and data reduction process is numerically unstable.  26   27  Transport  edit  Accelerometers are used to detect apogee in both professional  28  and in amateur  29  rocketry. Accelerometers are also being used in Intelligent Compaction rollers. Accelerometers are used alongside gyroscopes in inertial navigation systems.  30  One of the most common uses for MEMS accelerometers is in airbag deployment systems for modern automobiles. In this case the accelerometers are used to detect the rapid negative acceleration of the vehicle to determine when a collision has occurred and the severity of the collision. Another common automotive use is in electronic stability control systems which use a lateral accelerometer to measure cornering forces. The widespread use of accelerometers in the automotive industry has pushed their cost down dramatically.  31  Another automotive application is the monitoring of noise vibration and harshness NVH conditions that cause discomfort for drivers and passengers and may also be indicators of mechanical faults. Tilting trains use accelerometers and gyroscopes to calculate the required tilt.  32  Volcanology  edit  Modern electronic accelerometers are used in remote sensing devices intended for the monitoring of active volcanoes to detect the motion of magma .  33  Consumer electronics  edit  Accelerometers are increasingly being incorporated into personal electronic devices to detect the orientation of the device for example a display screen. A freefall sensor FFS is an accelerometer used to detect if a system has been dropped and is falling. It can then apply safety measures such as parking the head of a hard disk to prevent a head crash and resulting data loss upon impact. This device is included in the many common computer and consumer electronic products that are produced by a variety of manufacturers. It is also used in some data loggers to monitor handling operations for shipping containers . The length of time in free fall is used to calculate the height of drop and to estimate the shock to the package. Motion input  edit  Triaxis Digital Accelerometer by Kionix  inside Motorola Xoom Some smartphones  digital audio players and personal digital assistants contain accelerometers for user interface control often the accelerometer is used to present landscape or portrait views of the devices screen based on the way the device is being held. Apple has included an accelerometer in every generation of iPhone  iPad  and iPod touch  as well as in every iPod nano since the 4th generation. Along with orientation view adjustment accelerometers in mobile devices can also be used as pedometers  in conjunction with specialized applications .  34  Automatic Collision Notification ACN systems also use accelerometers in a system to call for help in event of a vehicle crash. Prominent ACN systems include OnStar AACN service Ford Links 911 Assist  Toyotas Safety Connect  Lexus Link  or BMW Assist . Many accelerometerequipped smartphones also have ACN software available for download. ACN systems are activated by detecting crashstrength accelerations. Accelerometers are used in vehicle Electronic stability control systems to measure the vehicles actual movement. A computer compares the vehicles actual movement to the drivers steering and throttle input. The stability control computer can selectively brake individual wheels andor reduce engine power to minimize the difference between driver input and the vehicles actual movement. This can help prevent the vehicle from spinning or rolling over. Some pedometers use an accelerometer to more accurately measure the number of steps taken and distance traveled than a mechanical sensor can provide. Nintendos Wii video game console uses a controller called a Wii Remote that contains a threeaxis accelerometer and was designed primarily for motion input. Users also have the option of buying an additional motionsensitive attachment the Nunchuk  so that motion input could be recorded from both of the users hands independently. Is also used on the Nintendo 3DS system. Sleep phase alarm clocks use accelerometric sensors to detect movement of a sleeper so that it can wake the person when heshe is not in REM phase in order to awaken the person more easily.  35  Sound recording  edit  A microphone or eardrum is a membrane that responds to oscillations in air pressure.  These oscillations cause acceleration so accelerometers can be used to record sound.  36  A 2012 study found that voices can be detected by smartphone accelerometers in 93 of typical daily situations.  37  Conversely carefully designed sounds can cause accelerometers to report false data.  One study tested 20 models of MEMS smartphone accelerometers and found that a majority were susceptible to this attack.  38  Orientation sensing  edit  A number of 21stcentury devices use accelerometers to align the screen depending on the direction the device is held e.g. switching between portrait and landscape modes . Such devices include many tablet PCs and some smartphones and digital cameras . The Amida Simputer  a handheld Linux device launched in 2004 was the first commercial handheld to have a builtin accelerometer. It incorporated many gesturebased interactions using this accelerometer including pageturning zoomin and zoomout of images change of portrait to landscape mode and many simple gesturebased games. As of January 2009 almost all new mobile phones and digital cameras contain at least a tilt sensor and sometimes an accelerometer for the purpose of auto image rotation motionsensitive minigames and correcting shake when taking photographs. Image stabilization  edit  Camcorders use accelerometers for image stabilization  either by moving optical elements to adjust the light path to the sensor to cancel out unintended motions or digitally shifting the image to smooth out detected motion. Some stills cameras use accelerometers for antiblur capturing. The camera holds off capturing the image when the camera is moving. When the camera is still if only for a millisecond as could be the case for vibration the image is captured. An example of the application of this technology is the Glogger VS2  39  a phone application which runs on Symbian based phones with accelerometers such as the Nokia N96 . Some digital cameras contain accelerometers to determine the orientation of the photo being taken and also for rotating the current picture when viewing. Device integrity  edit  Main article Active harddrive protection Many laptops feature an accelerometer which is used to detect drops. If a drop is detected the heads of the hard disk are parked to avoid data loss and possible head or disk damage by the ensuing shock . Gravimetry  edit  Main article gravimeter A gravimeter or gravitometer is an instrument used in gravimetry for measuring the local gravitational field . A gravimeter is a type of accelerometer except that accelerometers are susceptible to all vibrations including noise  that cause oscillatory accelerations. This is counteracted in the gravimeter by integral vibration isolation and signal processing . Though the essential principle of design is the same as in accelerometers gravimeters are typically designed to be much more sensitive than accelerometers in order to measure very tiny changes within the Earths gravity  of 1 g . In contrast other accelerometers are often designed to measure 1000 g or more and many perform multiaxial measurements. The constraints on temporal resolution are usually less for gravimeters so that resolution can be increased by processing the output with a longer time constant. Types of accelerometer  edit  Bulk micromachined capacitive Bulk micromachined piezoelectric resistive Capacitive spring mass system base DC response Electromechanical servo servo force balance High gravity High temperature Laser accelerometer Low frequency Magnetic induction Modally tuned impact hammers Nullbalance Optical Pendulous integrating gyroscopic accelerometer PIGA Piezoelectric accelerometer Quantum rubidium atom cloud laser cooled Resonance Seat pad accelerometers Shear mode accelerometer Strain gauge Surface acoustic wave SAW Surface micromachined capacitive  MEMS  Thermal submicrometre CMOS process Triaxial Vacuum diode with flexible anode  40  potentiometric type LVDT type accelerometer Exploits and privacy concerns  edit  Accelerometer data which can be accessed by thirdparty apps without user permission in many mobile devices  41  has been used to infer rich information about users based on the recorded motion patterns e.g. driving behavior level of intoxication age gender touchscreen inputs geographic location.  42  If done without a users knowledge or consent this is referred to as an inference attack . Additionally millions of smartphones could be vulnerable to software cracking via accelerometers.  43   44  See also  edit  Wikimedia Commons has media related to Accelerometers . Accelerograph Degrees of freedom gforce Geophone Gyroscope Inclinometer Inertial measurement unit Inertial navigation system Magnetometer Seismometer Vibration calibrator References  edit   Tinder Richard F. 2007. Relativistic Flight Mechanics and Space Travel A Primer for Students Engineers and Scientists . Morgan  Claypool Publishers. p. 33. ISBN 9781598291308 . Extract of page 33  a b Rindler W. 2013. Essential Relativity Special General and Cosmological illustrated ed.. Springer. p. 61. ISBN 9781475711356 . Extract of page 61  Corke Peter 2017. Robotics Vision and Control Fundamental Algorithms In MATLAB second completely revised extended and updated ed.. Springer. p. 83. ISBN 9783319544137 . Extract of page 83  Einstein Albert 1920. 20 . Relativity The Special and General Theory . New York Henry Holt. p. 168. ISBN 9781587340925 .  Penrose Roger 2005 . 17.4 The Principle of Equivalence. The Road to Reality . New York Knopf. pp. 393394 . ISBN 9780470085783 .  Doscher James. Accelerometer Design and Applications . Analog Devices . Archived from the original on 13 December 2008 . Retrieved 23 December 2008 .  Mukherjee Rahul Basu Joydeep Mandal Pradip Guha Prasanta Kumar 2017. A review of micromachined thermal accelerometers . Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering . 27 12 123002. arXiv  1801.07297 . Bibcode  2017JMiMi..27l3002M . doi  10.108813616439aa964d . S2CID 116232359 .  Yoda et al. 2001 Journal of Experimental Biology 2044 685690  Shepard Emily L. C. Wilson Rory P. Quintana Flavio Laich Agustina Gómez Liebsch Nikolai Albaredas Diego A. Halsey Lewis G. Gleiss Adrian Morgan David T. Myers Andrew E. Newman Chris Macdonald David W. Identification of animal movement patterns using triaxial accelerometry PDF . intres.com . Archived PDF from the original on 7 November 2012 . Retrieved 11 September 2014 .  Kawabe et al. 2003 Fisheries Science 69 5959  965  Wilson et al. 2006 Journal of Animal Ecology 75 51081  1090  Walsum Tessa A. Van Perna Andrea Bishop Charles M. Murn Campbell P. Collins Philip M. Wilson Rory P. Halsey Lewis G. 2020. Exploring the relationship between flapping behaviour and accelerometer signal during ascending flight and a new approach to calibration PDF . Ibis . 162 1 13 26. doi  10.1111ibi.12710 . ISSN 1474919X . S2CID 92209276 .  Viecelli Claudio Graf David Aguayo David Hafen Ernst Füchslin Rudolf M. 15 July 2020. Using smartphone accelerometer data to obtain scientific mechanicalbiological descriptors of resistance exercise training . PLOS ONE . 15 7 e0235156. Bibcode  2020PLoSO..1535156V . doi  10.1371journal.pone.0235156 . ISSN 19326203 . PMC 7363108 . PMID 32667945 .  Studd Emily K. Derbyshire Rachael E. Menzies Allyson K. Simms John F. Humphties Murray M. Murray Dennis M. Boutin Stan 2021. The Purrfect Catch Using accelerometers and audio recorders to document kill rates and hunting behaviour of a small prey specialist . Methods in Ecology and Evolution . 12 7 1277 1287. Bibcode  2021MEcEv..12.1277S . doi  10.11112041210X.13605 . S2CID 235537052 .  Klubnik Renard Sullivan Ron.  Know the Age of your Pumps  PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 14 November 2012 . Retrieved 9 January 2009 .  Wilcoxon Research. Guidance for mounting 420 mA vibration sensors on fans PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 11 September 2014 .  Klubnik Renard Sullivan Ron. Know the Health of your Pumps PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 14 November 2012 . Retrieved 11 September 2014 .  Low Frequency Vibration Measurements on a Compressor Gear Set PDF . wilcoxon research . 14 November 2014. Archived from the original PDF on 14 November 2012 . Retrieved 11 September 2014 . The gear set on a critical turbocompressor was monitored with a standard industrial accelerometer at very low frequencies...  Gearbox tutorial PDF . Wilcoxon Research. 11 September 2014. Archived from the original PDF on 14 November 2012 . Retrieved 9 January 2009 .  Bearing Failure Causes and Cures Bearing Failure Causes and Cures PDF . wilcoxon.com . Archived from the original PDF on 22 September 2015 . Retrieved 11 September 2014 .  The Contender 3 Episode 1 SPARQ testing ESPN  Welcome to GoHerman.com innovator of interactive personal training for fitness  MARTIAL ARTS  MMA . Retrieved 12 September 2014 .  Nosovitz Dan 12 January 2011. NFL Testing Helmets With ImpactSensing Accelerometers for Concussion Analysis . Popular Science . Archived from the original on 12 September 2014.  Irvin Hussein LópezNava 2010. Towards Ubiquitous Acquisition and Processing of Gait Parameters. Towards Ubiquitous Acquisition and Processing of Gait Parameters  Springer . Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Vol. 6437. pp. 410 421. doi  10.10079783642167614_36 . ISBN 9783642167607 .  LopezNava I. H. et MunozMelendez A. 2010. Towards ubiquitous acquisition and processing of gait parameters . In 9th Mexican International Conference on Artificial Intelligence Hidalgo Mexico.   Vertical Speed Measurement  by Ed Hahn in sci.aeronautics.airliners 19961122 . Retrieved 12 September 2014 .  US patent 6640165  Hayward Kirk W. and Stephenson Larry G. Method and system of determining altitude of flying object issued 20031028  Dual Deployment . Retrieved 12 September 2014 .  PICO altimeter . Archived from the original on 19 December 2005 . Retrieved 12 September 2014 .  Design of an integrated strapdown guidance and control system for a tactical missile WILLIAMS D. E.RICHMAN J.FRIEDLAND B. Singer Co. Kearfott Div. Little Falls NJ AIAA19832169 IN Guidance and Control Conference Gatlinburg TN 1517 August 1983 Collection of Technical Papers A8341659 1963. New York American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 1983 p. 5766.  Andrejašic Matej March 2008. MEMS ACCELEROMETERS PDF . University of Ljubljana. Archived PDF from the original on 11 June 2014.  Tilting trains shorten transit time Archived 4 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Memagazine.org. Retrieved on 17 October 2011.  Michael Randall. USGS  volcano monitoring . Retrieved 12 September 2014 .  Eaton Kit 18 February 2014. These Apps Are Made For Walking  NYTimes.com . The New York Times . Retrieved 12 September 2014 .  Nam Yunyoung Kim Yeesock Lee Jinseok 23 May 2016. Sleep Monitoring Based on a TriAxial Accelerometer and a Pressure Sensor . Sensors Basel Switzerland . 16 5 750. Bibcode  2016Senso..16..750N . doi  10.3390s16050750 . PMC 4883440 . PMID 27223290 .   Using MEMS Accelerometers as Acoustic Pickups in Musical Instruments   IEEE 2012 Speech Activity Detection using Accelerometer Aleksandar Matic et.al.   IEEE Spectrum Smartphone Accelerometers Can Be Fooled by Sound Waves.  Glogger . Retrieved 12 September 2014 .  Mullard DDR100 Accelerometer Double Diode data sheet PDF . Retrieved 7 May 2013 .  Bai Xiaolong Yin Jie Wang YuPing 2017. Sensor Guardian prevent privacy inference on Android sensors . EURASIP Journal on Information Security . 2017 1. doi  10.1186s1363501700618 . ISSN 2510523X .  Kröger Jacob Leon Raschke Philip January 2019. Privacy implications of accelerometer data a review of possible inferences. Proceedings of the International Conference on Cryptography Security and Privacy . ACM New York. pp. 81 87. doi  10.11453309074.3309076 .  Dockrill Peter 18 March 2017. Millions of Smartphones Could Be Vulnerable to Hacking Via Sound Waves . ScienceAlert . Retrieved 13 March 2019 .  Nordrum Amy 17 March 2017. Smartphone Accelerometers Can Be Fooled by Sound Waves . IEEE Spectrum Technology Engineering and Science News . Retrieved 13 March 2019 .