Response to a terrifying traumatic or surprising experience Not to be confused with Acute stress response or Combat stress reaction . Medical condition Acute stress reaction Other names Acute stress disorder psychological shock mental shock shock Specialty Psychiatry Symptoms Shortterm Hyperarousal  decreased sensation of pain  mental distress  loss of consciousness Longterm Disturbing thoughts feelings or dreams related to the event dissociation  irritability  increased startle and fightorflight response Duration  1 month Causes Exposure to a traumatic event Differential diagnosis Posttraumatic stress disorder  adjustment disorder Part of a series on Emotions Affect Classification In animals Emotional intelligence Mood Selfregulation Interpersonal Dysregulation Valence Emotions Acceptance Admiration Affection Amusement Anger Angst Anguish Annoyance Anticipation Anxiety Apathy Arousal Awe Belongingness Boredom Confidence Confusion Contempt Contentment Courage Curiosity Depression Desire Determination Disappointment Disgust Distrust Doubt Ecstasy Elevation Embarrassment Emotional Detachment Empathy Enthusiasm Envy Euphoria Faith Fear Frustration Gratification Gratitude Greed Grief Guilt Happiness Hatred Hope Horror Hostility Humiliation Interest Jealousy Joy Kindness Limerence Loneliness Love Lust Nostalgia Outrage Panic Passion Pity Pleasure Pride Rage Regret Rejection Relief Remorse Resentment Sadness Saudade Schadenfreude Selfpity Shame Shock Shyness Social connection Sorrow Suffering Surprise Suspicion Trust Wonder Worry v t e Acute stress reaction  ASR  also known as psychological shock  mental shock  or simply shock   a  as well as acute stress disorder  ASD  is a psychological response to a terrifying traumatic  or surprising experience. The reactions may include but are not limited to intrusive thoughts  or dissociation  and reactivity symptoms such as avoidance or hyperarousal . It may be exhibited for days or weeks after the traumatic event.  1  If the condition is not correctly addressed it may develop into posttraumatic stress disorder PTSD.  2   3  Diagnosis  edit  The International Classification of Diseases ICD treats this condition differently from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders DSM.
According to the ICD11  acute stress reaction refers to the symptoms experienced a few hours to a few days after exposure to a traumatic event. In contrast DSM5 defines acute stress disorder by symptoms experienced 48 hours to one month following the event. Symptoms experienced for longer than one month are consistent with a diagnosis of PTSD per both classifications. ICD11 criteria  edit  The ICD11 MMS gives the following description Acute stress reaction refers to the development of transient emotional somatic cognitive or behavioural symptoms as a result of exposure to an event or situation either short or longlasting of an extremely threatening or horrific nature e.g. natural or humanmade disasters combat serious accidents sexual violence assault. Symptoms may include autonomic signs of anxiety e.g. tachycardia sweating flushing being in a daze confusion sadness anxiety anger despair overactivity inactivity social withdrawal or stupor. The response to the stressor is considered to be normal given the severity of the stressor. Symptoms typically appear within hours to days following the stressful event and usually begin to subside within a few days after the event or following removal from the threatening situation when this is possible. In cases where the stressor is ongoing or removal is not possible symptoms may persist but are usually greatly reduced within approximately 1 month as the person adapts to the changed situation. Acute Stress Reaction in helpseeking individuals is usually but not necessarily accompanied by substantial subjective distress andor interference with personal functioning. In children responses to stressful events can include somatic symptoms e.g. stomachaches or headaches disruptive or oppositional behaviour regression hyperactivity tantrums concentration problems irritability withdrawal excessive daydreaming increased clinginess bedwetting and sleep disturbances. In adolescents responses can include substance use and various forms of acting out or risktaking. DSM5 criteria  edit  According to the DSM5 acute stress disorder requires the exposure to actual or threatened death serious injury or sexual violation by either directly experiencing it witnessing it in person learning it occurred to a close family or friend or experiencing repeated exposure to aversive details of a traumatic event.  4  In addition to the initial exposure individuals may also present with a variety of different symptoms that fall within several clusters including intrusion negative mood  dissociation  avoidance of distressing memories and emotional arousal. Intrusion symptoms include recurring and distressing dreams flashbacks or memories related to the traumatic event and related somatic symptoms.  4  Negative mood refers to ones inability to experience positive emotions such as happiness or satisfaction.  4  Dissociative symptoms include a sense of numbing or detachment from emotional reactions a sense of physical detachment decreased awareness of ones surroundings the perception that ones environment is unreal or dreamlike and the inability to recall critical aspects of the traumatic event  dissociative amnesia .  5  Emotional arousal symptoms include sleep disturbances  hypervigilance  difficulties with concentration more common startle response  and irritability.  4  Symptom presentation must last for at least three consecutive days after trauma exposure to be classified as acute stress disorder. If symptoms persist past one month the diagnosis of PTSD should be assessed for.  4  The presenting symptoms must also cause significant impairment in multiple domains of ones life to be diagnosed.  4  Additional diagnoses that may develop from acute stress disorder include depression  anxiety  mood disorders  and substance abuse problems. Untreated acute stress disorder can also lead to the development of posttraumatic stress disorder.  6  Diagnostic assessment  edit  Evaluation of patients is done through close examination of emotional response. Using selfreport from patients is a large part of diagnosing acute stress disorder as acute stress is the result of reactions to stressful situations.  6  Risk factors  edit  Risk factors for developing acute stress disorder include a previously existing mental health diagnosis avoidant coping mechanisms and exaggerated appraisals of events.  4  Additional factors also include prior trauma history and heightened emotional reactivity.  4  The DSM5 specifies that there is a higher prevalence of acute stress disorder among females compared to males due to neurobiological gender differences in stress response as well as an alleged higher risk of experiencing traumatic events a now defunct assumption originating from the continued prevalence of the Duluth Model in the legal cultures of relevant demographics despite its having been soundly discredited in modern times by an overwhelming body of combined research and clinical experience even though this specification has since been demonstrated to be erroneous no official updates to the DSM have been committed to reflect as much. As a consequence of this oversight combined with the multitude of pervasive social stigmas and doublestandards currently surrounding male mental health in many areas of the world acute stress disorder and PTSD are both underreported and underdiagnosed in a majority of male populations to date. A substantially increased realization of risk factors followed by a corresponding surge in diagnoses for males over the next several decades should be expected.  4  Types  edit  Sympathetic  edit  See also Fightorflight response Sympathetic acute stress disorder is caused by the release of excessive adrenaline and norepinephrine into the nervous system . These hormones may speed up a persons pulse and respiratory rate  dilate pupils  or temporarily mask pain . This type of ASR developed as an evolutionary advantage to help humans survive dangerous situations. The  fightorflight response  may allow for temporarilyenhanced physical output even in the face of severe injury. However other physical illnesses become more difficult to diagnose as ASR masks the pain and other vital signs that would otherwise be symptomatic.  2  Parasympathetic  edit  Parasympathetic acute stress disorder is characterized by feeling faint and nauseated . This response is fairly often triggered by the sight of blood. In this stress response the body releases acetylcholine . In many ways this reaction is the opposite of the sympathetic response in that it slows the heart rate and can cause the patient to either regurgitate or temporarily lose consciousness. The evolutionary value of this is unclear although it may have allowed for prey to appear dead to avoid being eaten.  2  Pathophysiology  edit  Stress is characterised by specific physiological responses to adverse or noxious stimuli. Hans Selye was the first to coin the term general adaptation syndrome to suggest that stressinduced physiological responses proceed through the stages of alarm resistance and exhaustion.  7  The sympathetic branch of the autonomic nervous system gives rise to a specific set of physiological responses to physical or psychological stress. The bodys response to stress is also termed a fight or flight response and it is characterised by an increase in blood flow to the skeletal muscles  heart and brain a rise in heart rate and blood pressure dilation of pupils and an increase in the amount of glucose released by the liver.  8  The onset of an acute stress response is associated with specific physiological actions in the sympathetic nervous system both directly and indirectly through the release of adrenaline and to a lesser extent noradrenaline from the medulla of the adrenal glands . These catecholamine hormones facilitate immediate physical reactions by triggering increases in heart rate and breathing constricting blood vessels . An abundance of catecholamines at neuroreceptor sites facilitates reliance on spontaneous or intuitive behaviours often related to combat or escape.  9  Normally when a person is in a serene nonstimulated state the firing of neurons in the locus ceruleus is minimal. A novel stimulus once perceived is relayed from the sensory cortex of the brain through the thalamus to the brain stem . That route of signalling increases the rate of noradrenergic activity in the locus ceruleus and the person becomes more alert and attentive to their environment.  10  If a stimulus is perceived as a threat a more intense and prolonged discharge of the locus ceruleus activates the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system.  11  The activation of the sympathetic nervous system leads to the release of norepinephrine from nerve endings acting on the heart blood vessels respiratory centers and other sites. The ensuing physiological changes constitute a major part of the acute stress response. The other major player in the acute stress response is the hypothalamicpituitaryadrenal axis . Stress activates this axis and produces neurobiological changes. These chemical changes increase the chances of survival by bringing the physiological system back to homeostasis.  12  The autonomic nervous system controls all automatic functions in the body and contains two subsections within it that aid the response to an acute stress reaction. These two subunits are the sympathetic nervous system and the parasympathetic nervous system . The sympathetic response is colloquially known as the  fightorflight response  indicated by accelerated pulse and respiration rates pupil dilation and a general feeling of anxiety and hyperawareness. This is caused by the release of epinephrine and norepinephrine from the adrenal glands. The epinephrine and norepinephrine strike the beta receptors of the heart which feeds the hearts sympathetic nerve fibres to increase the strength of heart muscle contraction as a result more blood gets circulated increasing the heart rate and respiratory rate. The sympathetic nervous system also stimulates the skeletal system and muscular system to pump more blood to those areas to handle the acute stress. Simultaneously the sympathetic nervous system inhibits the digestive system and the urinary system to optimize blood flow to the heart lungs and skeletal muscles. This plays a role in the alarm reaction stage. The parasympathetic response is colloquially known as the rest and digest response indicated by reduced heart and respiration rates and more obviously by a temporary loss of consciousness if the system is fired at a rapid rate. The parasympathetic nervous system stimulates the digestive system and urinary system to send more blood to those systems to increase the process of digestion. To do this it must inhibit the cardiovascular system and respiratory system to optimise blood flow to the digestive tract  causing low heart and respiratory rates. The parasympathetic nervous system plays no role in acute stress response.  13   14  Studies have shown that patients with acute stress disorder have overactive right amygdalae and prefrontal cortices both structures are involved in the fearprocessing pathway.  3  Treatment  edit  This disorder may resolve itself with time or may develop into a more severe disorder such as PTSD. However results of Creamer ODonnell and Pattisons 2004 study of 363 patients suggests that a diagnosis of acute stress disorder had only limited predictive validity for PTSD. Creamer et al. found that reexperiences of the traumatic event and arousal were better predictors of PTSD.  15  Early pharmacotherapy may prevent the development of posttraumatic symptoms.  16  Additionally early traumafocused cognitive behavioural therapy TFCBT for those with a diagnosis of ASD can protect an individual from developing chronic PTSD.  17  Studies have been conducted to assess the efficacy of counselling and psychotherapy for people with acute stress disorder. Cognitive behavioural therapy which includes exposure and cognitive restructuring was found to be effective in preventing PTSD in patients diagnosed with acute stress disorder with clinically significant results at sixmonth followup appointments. A combination of relaxation cognitive restructuring  imaginal exposure and invivo exposure was superior to supportive counselling.  18  Mindfulness based stress reduction programmes also appear to be effective for stress management.  19  The pharmacological approach has made some progress in lessening the effects of acute stress disorder. To relax patients and allow for better sleep prazosin can be given to patients which regulates their sympathetic response.  6  Hydrocortisone has shown some success as an early preventative measure following a traumatic event typically in the treatment of PTSD.  20  In a wilderness context where counseling psychotherapy  and cognitive behavioral therapy is unlikely to be available the treatment for acute stress reaction is very similar to the treatment of cardiogenic shock  vascular shock  and hypovolemic shock  that is allowing the patient to lie down providing reassurance and removing the stimulus that prompted the reaction. In traditional shock cases this generally means relieving injury pain or stopping blood loss. In an acute stress reaction this may mean pulling a rescuer away from the emergency to calm down or blocking the sight of an injured friend from a patient.  13  History  edit  The term acute stress disorder ASD was first used to describe the symptoms of soldiers during World War I and II  and it was therefore also termed  combat stress reaction  CSR. Approximately 20 of U.S. troops displayed symptoms of CSR during WWII. It was assumed to be a temporary response of healthy individuals to witnessing or experiencing traumatic events. Symptoms include depression anxiety withdrawal confusion paranoia and sympathetic hyperactivity.  5  The American Psychiatric Association officially included ASD in the DSMIV in 1994. Before that symptomatic individuals within the first month of trauma were diagnosed with adjustment disorder .  5  Initially being able to describe different ASRs was one of the goals of introducing ASD. Some criticisms surrounding ASDs focal point include issues with ASD recognising other distressing emotional reactions like depression and shame. Emotional reactions similar to these may then be diagnosed as adjustment disorder under the current system of trying to diagnose ASD.  21  Since its addition to the DSMIV  questions about the efficacy and purpose of the ASD diagnosis have been raised. The diagnosis of ASD was criticized as an unnecessary addition to the progress of diagnosing PTSD as some considered it more akin to a sign of PTSD than an independent issue requiring diagnosis.  22  Also the terms ASD and ASR have been criticized for not fully covering the range of stress reactions.  23  Notes  edit   Not to be confused with circulatory shock . References  edit   Friedman Matthew J. 2015. Posttraumatic and acute stress disorders Sixth ed.. Cham Springer International Publishing Switzerland. p. 118. ISBN 9783319150666 . OCLC 904253583 .  a b c Isaac Jeff. 2013. Wilderness and rescue medicine . Jones  Bartlett Learning. ISBN 9780763789206 . OCLC 785442005 .  a b Reynaud Emmanuelle Guedj Eric Trousselard Marion El KhouryMalhame Myriam Zendjidjian Xavier Fakra Eric Souville Marc Nazarian Bruno Blin Olivier Canini Frédéric Khalfa Stephanie 2015. Acute stress disorder modifies cerebral activity of amygdala and prefrontal cortex. Cognitive Neuroscience . 6 1 39 43. doi  10.108017588928.2014.996212 . PMID 25599382 . S2CID 12378221 .  a b c d e f g h i American Psychiatric Association 2013. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders 5 ed. . Arlington VA American Psychiatric Publishing.  a b c Bryant R. Harvey A. 2000. Acute Stress Disorder A Handbook Of Theory Assessment And Treatment . Washington D.C. American Psychological Association. pp. 3 40 87 134.  a b c Fanai Mehdi Khan Moien AB 2021 Acute Stress Disorder  StatPearls  Treasure Island FL StatPearls Publishing PMID 32809650  retrieved 20210314  Butler G 1993. Definitions of stress . Occasional Paper Royal College of General Practitioners 61 1 5. PMC 2560943 . PMID 8199583 .  Widmaier Eric P. 2015. Vanders Human Physiology The Mechanisms Of Body Function . Boston McGrawHill Education. p. 182. ISBN 9781259607790 .  Eiden Lee E. 2013. NeuropeptideCatecholamine Interactions in Stress. A New Era of Catecholamines in the Laboratory and Clinic . Advances in Pharmacology. Vol. 68. pp. 399 404. doi  10.1016B9780124115125.00018X . ISBN 9780124115125 . ISSN 10543589 . PMC 3928117 . PMID 24054154 .  McEwen Bruce S. Bowles Nicole P. Gray Jason D. Hill Matthew N. Hunter Richard G. Karatsoreos Ilia N. Nasca Carla 2015. Mechanisms of stress in the brain . Nature Neuroscience . 18 10 1353 1363. doi  10.1038nn.4086 . ISSN 10976256 . PMC 4933289 . PMID 26404710 .  Robins Clive J. 1993. Cognitive therapy with inpatients. J. Wright M. Thase A. Beck J. Ludgate eds. Guilford Press New York 1993. 445 pp. 36.95. Depression . 1 6 329 330. doi  10.1002depr.3050010609 . ISSN 10626417 .  Tsigos Constantine Chrousos George P October 2002. Hypothalamicpituitaryadrenal axis neuroendocrine factors and stress . Journal of Psychosomatic Research . 53 4 865 871. doi  10.1016s0022399902004294 . ISSN 00223999 . PMID 12377295 .  a b Isaac Jeffrey E. Johnson David E. 2013. Wilderness and Rescue Medicine . Burlington MA Jones  Bartlett Learning. pp. 27 8. ISBN 9780763789206 .  VanPutte C. L. Regan J. Russo A. Seeley R. R. Stephens T. D. Tate P.  Seeley R. R. 2014. Seeleys anatomy  physiology . New York NY McGrawHill.  Creamer Mark oDonnell Meaghan L Pattison Phillipa 2004. The relationship between acute stress disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder in severely injured trauma survivors . Behaviour Research and Therapy . 42 3 315 28. doi  10.1016s0005796703001414 . PMID 14975772 .  Vaiva G Ducrocq F Jezequel K Averland B Lestavel P Brunet A Marmar C. R 2003. Immediate treatment with propranolol decreases posttraumatic stress disorder two months after trauma. Biological Psychiatry . 54 9 947 9. doi  10.1016s0006322303004128 . PMID 14573324 . S2CID 3064619 .  Kornør Hege Winje Dagfinn Ekeberg Øivind Weisæth Lars Kirkehei Ingvild Johansen Kjell Steiro Asbjørn September 2008. Early traumafocused cognitivebehavioural therapy to prevent chronic posttraumatic stress disorder and related symptoms A systematic review and metaanalysis . BMC Psychiatry . 8  8. doi  10.11861471244x881 . PMC 2559832 . PMID 18801204 .  Lambert M.J. ed. 2004. Bergin and Garfields Handbook of Psychotherapy and Behavioral Change . New York Wiley.  page needed   Sharma Manoj Rush Sarah E 2014. MindfulnessBased Stress Reduction as a Stress Management Intervention for Healthy Individuals . Journal of EvidenceBased Complementary  Alternative Medicine . 19 4 271 86. doi  10.11772156587214543143 . PMID 25053754 .  Astill Wright Laurence Sijbrandij Marit Sinnerton Rob Lewis Catrin Roberts Neil P. Bisson Jonathan I. December 2019. Pharmacological prevention and early treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder and acute stress disorder a systematic review and metaanalysis . Translational Psychiatry . 9 1 334. doi  10.1038s4139801906735 . ISSN 21583188 . PMC 6901463 . PMID 31819037 .  Bryant Richard A. Friedman Matthew J. Spiegel David Ursano Robert Strain James September 2011. A review of acute stress disorder in DSM5 . Depression and Anxiety . 28 9 802 817. doi  10.1002da.20737 . PMID 21910186 . S2CID 46689852 .  Harvey Allison G. Bryant Richard A. 2002. Acute stress disorder A synthesis and critique . Psychological Bulletin . 128 6 886 902. doi  10.103700332909.128.6.886 . ISSN 19391455 . PMID 12405136 .  Isserlin Leanna Zerach Gadi Solomon Zahava 2008. Acute stress responses A review and synthesis of ASD ASR and CSR . American Journal of Orthopsychiatry . 78 4 423 429. doi  10.1037a0014304 . ISSN 19390025 . PMID 19123763 . Classification D ICD  11  QE84 ICD  10  F43.0 ICD  9CM  308 MeSH  D040701 v t e Emotions  list  Emotions Acceptance Admiration Adoration Aesthetic Affection Agitation Agony Amusement Anger Angst Anguish Annoyance Anticipation Anxiety Apathy Arousal Attraction Awe Belongingness Boredom Calmness Compassion Confidence Confusion Contempt Contentment Courage Cruelty Curiosity Defeat Depression Desire Disappointment Disgust Distrust Doubt Ecstasy Embarrassment vicarious Emotion work Empathy Emptiness Enthrallment Enthusiasm Envy Euphoria Excitement Faith Fear Flow Frustration Gratification Gratitude Greed Grief Guilt Happiness Joie de vivre Hatred Hiraeth Homesickness Hope Horror Hostility Humiliation Hygge Hysteria Ikigai sense of purpose Indulgence Infatuation Insecurity Inspiration Interest Irritation Isolation Jealousy Joy Kindness Loneliness Love limerence at first sight Lust Mono no aware Neglect Nostalgia Outrage Panic Passion Pity selfpity Pleasure Pride grandiosity hubris insult vanity Rage Regret Rejection Relief Remorse Resentment Revenge Sadness melancholy Saudade Schadenfreude Sehnsucht Sentimentality Shame Shock Shyness Social connection Sorrow Spite Stress chronic Suffering Surprise Sympathy Trust Wonder sense of wonder Worry Worldviews Cynicism Defeatism Fatalism Misanthropy Nihilism Optimism Pessimism Reclusion Weltschmerz Related Affect consciousness in education measures in psychology Affective computing forecasting neuroscience science spectrum Affectivity positive negative Appeal to emotion Amygdala hijack Emotion and art and memory and music and sex and sleep classification evolution expressed functional accounts group homeostatic in animals perception recognition in conversation regulation interpersonal work Emotional aperture bias blackmail competence conflict contagion detachment dysregulation eating exhaustion expression and gender intelligence and bullying Empathy quotient intimacy isolation lability labor lateralization literacy prosody reasoning responsivity security symbiosis thought method wellbeing Emotionality bounded Emotions and culture history in decisionmaking in the workplace in virtual communication moral selfconscious social social sharing sociology Feeling Group affective tone Interactions between the emotional and executive brain systems Jealousy in art Metaemotion Pathognomy Pathos Social emotional development Stoic passions Theory affect appraisal constructed emotion discrete emotion somatic marker Italics indicate emotion names in foreign languages v t e Mental disorders  Classification  Adult personality and behavior Sexual Egodystonic sexual orientation Paraphilia Fetishism Voyeurism Sexual anhedonia Sexual anorexia Sexual maturation disorder Sexual relationship disorder Other Factitious disorder Munchausen syndrome Fear of intimacy Gender dysphoria Intermittent explosive disorder Dermatillomania Kleptomania Pyromania Trichotillomania Personality disorder Childhood and learning Emotional and behavioral ADHD Conduct disorder ODD Emotional and behavioral disorders Separation anxiety disorder Movement disorders Stereotypic Social functioning DAD RAD Selective mutism Speech Cluttering Stuttering Tic disorder Tourette syndrome Intellectual disability Xlinked intellectual disability LujanFryns syndrome Psychological development  developmental disabilities  Pervasive Specific Mood affective Bipolar Bipolar I Bipolar II Bipolar NOS Cyclothymia Depression Atypical depression Dysthymia Major depressive disorder Melancholic depression Seasonal affective disorder Mania Neurological and symptomatic Autism spectrum Autism Asperger syndrome Highfunctioning autism PDDNOS Savant syndrome Dementia AIDS dementia complex Alzheimers disease CreutzfeldtJakob disease Frontotemporal dementia Huntingtons disease Mild cognitive impairment Parkinsons disease Picks disease Sundowning Vascular dementia Wandering Other Delirium Organic brain syndrome Postconcussion syndrome Neurotic  stress related and somatoform Adjustment Adjustment disorder with depressed mood Anxiety Phobia Agoraphobia Childhood phobia Social anxiety Social phobia Anthropophobia Specific social phobia Specific phobia Claustrophobia Other Generalized anxiety disorder OCD Panic attack Panic disorder Stress Acute stress reaction PTSD Dissociative Depersonalizationderealization disorder Dissociative identity disorder Dissociative amnesia Dissociative fugue Dissociative disorder not otherwise specified Other specified dissociative disorder Somatic symptom Body dysmorphic disorder Conversion disorder Ganser syndrome Globus pharyngis Psychogenic nonepileptic seizures False pregnancy Hypochondriasis Mass psychogenic illness Nosophobia Psychogenic pain Somatization disorder Physiological and physical behavior Eating Anorexia nervosa Bulimia nervosa Rumination syndrome Other specified feeding or eating disorder Nonorganic sleep Hypersomnia Insomnia Parasomnia Night terror Nightmare REM sleep behavior disorder Postnatal Postpartum depression Postpartum psychosis Sexual desire Hypersexuality Hypoactive sexual desire disorder Psychoactive substances substance abuse and substancerelated Drug overdose Intoxication Physical dependence Rebound effect Stimulant psychosis Substance dependence Withdrawal Schizophrenia  schizotypal and delusional Delusional Delusional disorder Folie à deux Psychosis and schizophrenialike Brief reactive psychosis Schizoaffective disorder Schizophreniform disorder Schizophrenia Childhood schizophrenia Disorganized hebephrenic schizophrenia Pseudoneurotic schizophrenia Simpletype schizophrenia Other Catatonia Symptoms and uncategorized Impulsecontrol disorder KlüverBucy syndrome Psychomotor agitation Stereotypy