Service to direct pilots of aircraft Air traffic redirects here. For the Canadian band see Air Traffic Control band . For the Owl City song see Maybe Im Dreaming . This article is about civilian direction of aircraft. For other types of aircraft control see Air control . This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .  Learn how and when to remove these messages  This article possibly contains original research . Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.  April 2019   Learn how and when to remove this message  This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources Air traffic control  news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR  April 2019   Learn how and when to remove this message   Learn how and when to remove this message  The air traffic control tower of Mumbai International Airport in India. Air traffic control  ATC  is a service provided by groundbased air traffic controllers who direct aircraft on the ground and through a given section of controlled airspace  and can provide advisory services to aircraft in noncontrolled airspace. The primary purpose of ATC is to prevent collisions organize and expedite the flow of traffic in the air and provide information and other support for pilots.  1  Personnel of air traffic control monitor aircraft location in their assigned airspace by radar  and communicate with the pilots by radio .  2  To prevent collisions ATC enforces traffic separation rules which ensure each aircraft maintains a minimum amount of empty space around it at all times. It is also common for ATC to provide services to all private  military  and commercial aircraft operating within its airspace not just civilian aircraft.  citation needed  Depending on the type of flight and the class of airspace ATC may issue instructions that pilots are required to obey or advisories known as flight information in some countries that pilots may at their discretion disregard. The pilot in command of an aircraft always retains final authority for its safe operation and may in an emergency deviate from ATC instructions to the extent required to maintain safe operation of the aircraft.  3  Language  edit  See also Aeronautical phraseology and Aviation English Pursuant to requirements of the International Civil Aviation Organization ICAO ATC operations are conducted either in the English language or the local language used by the station on the ground.  4  In practice the native language for a region is used however English must be used upon request.  4  History  edit  In 1920 Croydon Airport near London England was the first airport in the world to introduce air traffic control.  5  The aerodrome control tower was a wooden hut 15 feet 5 metres high with windows on all four sides.  It was commissioned on 25 February 1920 and provided basic traffic weather and location information to pilots.  6   7  In the United States air traffic control developed three divisions. The first of several air mail radio stations AMRS was created in 1922 after World War I when the U.S. Post Office began using techniques developed by the U.S. Army to direct and track the movements of reconnaissance aircraft . Over time the AMRS morphed into flight service stations . Todays flight service stations do not issue control instructions but provide pilots with many other flight related informational services. They do relay control instructions from ATC in areas where flight service is the only facility with radio or phone coverage. The first airport traffic control tower regulating arrivals departures and surface movement of aircraft in the US at a specific airport opened in Cleveland in 1930.  Approach  departure control facilities were created after adoption of radar in the 1950s to monitor and control the busy airspace around larger airports. The first air route traffic control center ARTCC which directs the movement of aircraft between departure and destination was opened in Newark in 1935 followed in 1936 by Chicago and Cleveland.  8  Currently in the US the Federal Aviation Administration FAA operates 22 Air Route Traffic Control Centers . After the 1956 Grand Canyon midair collision  killing all 128 on board the FAA was given the airtraffic responsibility in the United States in 1958 and this was followed by other countries. In 1960 Britain France Germany and the Benelux countries set up Eurocontrol  intending to merge their airspaces. The first and only attempt to pool controllers between countries is the Maastricht Upper Area Control Centre MUAC founded in 1972 by Eurocontrol and covering Belgium Luxembourg the Netherlands and northwestern Germany. In 2001 the European Union EU aimed to create a Single European Sky hoping to boost efficiency and gain economies of scale.  9  Airport traffic control tower  edit  São PauloGuarulhos International Airport s control tower. Control tower at Birmingham Airport  England. Small control tower at Räyskälä Airfield in Loppi  Finland. The primary method of controlling the immediate airport environment is visual observation from the airport control tower.  The tower is typically a tall windowed structure located within the airport grounds.  The air traffic controllers  usually abbreviated controller are responsible for separation and efficient movement of aircraft and vehicles operating on the taxiways and runways of the airport itself and aircraft in the air near the airport generally 5 to 10 nautical miles 9 to 19 kilometres  6 to 12 miles  depending on the airport procedures.  A controller must carry out the job using the precise and effective application of rules and procedures however they need flexible adjustments according to differing circumstances often under time pressure.  10  In a study that compared stress in the general population and this kind of system markedly showed more stress level for controllers.  This variation can be explained at least in part by the characteristics of the job.  11  Surveillance displays are also available to controllers at larger airports to assist with controlling air traffic.  Controllers may use a radar system called secondary surveillance radar for airborne traffic approaching and departing.  These displays include a map of the area the position of various aircraft and data tags that include aircraft identification speed altitude and other information described in local procedures.  In adverse weather conditions the tower controllers may also use surface movement radar SMR surface movement guidance and control system SMGCS or advanced surface movement guidance and control system ASMGCS to control traffic on the manoeuvring area taxiways and runways. The areas of responsibility for tower controllers fall into three general operational disciplines local control or air control ground control and flight data  clearance delivery.  Other categories such as airport apron control or ground movement planner may also exist at extremely busy airports.  While each tower may have unique airportspecific procedures such as multiple teams of controllers  crews  at major or complex airports with multiple runways the following provides a general concept of the delegation of responsibilities within the air traffic control tower environment. Remote and virtual tower RVT is a system based on air traffic controllers being located somewhere other than at the local airport tower and still able to provide air traffic control services.  12   13   14  Displays for the air traffic controllers may be live video synthetic images based on surveillance sensor data or both. Ground control  edit  Inside Pope Field air traffic control tower. Ground control sometimes known as ground movement control  GMC is responsible for the airport movement areas  15  as well as areas not released to the airlines or other users.  This generally includes all taxiways inactive runways holding areas and some transitional aprons or intersections where aircraft arrive having vacated the runway or departure gate.  Exact areas and control responsibilities are clearly defined in local documents and agreements at each airport.  Any aircraft vehicle or person walking or working in these areas is required to have clearance from ground control.  This is normally done via VHF  UHF radio but there may be special cases where other procedures are used.  Aircraft or vehicles without radios must respond to ATC instructions via aviation light signals  or else be led by official airport vehicles with radios.  People working on the airport surface normally have a communications link through which they can communicate with ground control commonly either by handheld radio or even cell phone .  Ground control is vital to the smooth operation of the airport because this position impacts the sequencing of departure aircraft affecting the safety and efficiency of the airports operation. Some busier airports have surface movement radar SMR  15  such as ASDE3 AMASS or ASDEX  designed to display aircraft and vehicles on the ground.  These are used by ground control as an additional tool to control ground traffic particularly at night or in poor visibility.  There is a wide range of capabilities on these systems as they are being modernised.  Older systems will display a map of the airport and the target.  Newer systems include the capability to display higherquality mapping radar targets data blocks and safety alerts and to interface with other systems such as digital flight strips. Air control or local control  edit  Air control known to pilots as tower or tower control  is responsible for the active runway surfaces.  15  Air control gives clearance for aircraft takeoff or landing whilst ensuring that prescribed runway separation will exist at all times.  If the air controller detects any unsafe conditions a landing aircraft may be instructed to  goaround  and be resequenced into the landing pattern.  This resequencing will depend on the type of flight and may be handled by the air controller approach or terminal area controller. Within the tower a highly disciplined communications process between the air control and ground control is an absolute necessity.  Air control must ensure that ground control is aware of any operations that will impact the taxiways and work with the approach radar controllers to create gaps in the arrival traffic to allow taxiing traffic to cross runways and to allow departing aircraft to take off.  Ground control needs to keep the air controllers aware of the traffic flow towards their runways to maximise runway utilisation through effective approach spacing. Crew resource management CRM procedures are often used to ensure this communication process is efficient and clear.  Within ATC it is usually known as team resource management TRM and the level of focus on TRM varies within different ATC organisations. Flight data and clearance delivery  edit  Clearance delivery is the position that issues route clearances to aircraft typically before they commence taxiing.  These clearances contain details of the route that the aircraft is expected to fly after departure.  15  Clearance delivery or at busy airports ground movement planner GMP or traffic management coordinator TMC will if necessary coordinate with the relevant radar centre or flow control unit to obtain releases for aircraft.  At busy airports these releases are often automatic and are controlled by local agreements allowing freeflow departures.  When weather or extremely high demand for a certain airport or airspace becomes a factor there may be ground stops or slot delays or reroutes may be necessary to ensure the system does not get overloaded.  The primary responsibility of clearance delivery is to ensure that the aircraft has the correct aerodrome information such as weather and airport conditions the correct route after departure and time restrictions relating to that flight.  This information is also coordinated with the relevant radar centre or flow control unit and ground control to ensure that the aircraft reaches the runway in time to meet the time restriction provided by the relevant unit.  At some airports clearance delivery also plans aircraft pushbacks and engine starts in which case it is known as the ground movement planner GMP this position is particularly important at heavily congested airports to prevent taxiway and aircraft parking area gridlock. Flight data which is routinely combined with clearance delivery is the position that is responsible for ensuring that both controllers and pilots have the most current information pertinent weather changes outages airport ground delays  ground stops runway closures etc.  Flight data may inform the pilots using a recorded continuous loop on a specific frequency known as the automatic terminal information service ATIS. Approach and terminal control  edit  See also Terminal control area TRACON redirects here. For the video game series see TRACON series . Potomac Consolidated TRACON in Warrenton Virginia  United States. Many airports have a radar control facility that is associated with that specific airport.  In most countries this is referred to as terminal control and abbreviated to TMC in the U.S. it is referred to as a terminal radar approach control or TRACON.  While every airport varies terminal controllers usually handle traffic in a 30to50nauticalmile 56 to 93 km 35 to 58 mi radius from the airport.  Where there are many busy airports close together one consolidated terminal control centre may service all the airports.  The airspace boundaries and altitudes assigned to a terminal control centre which vary widely from airport to airport are based on factors such as traffic flows neighbouring airports and terrain.  A large and complex example was the London Terminal Control Centre LTCC which controlled traffic for five main London airports up to an altitude of 20000 feet 6096 metres and out to a distance of 100 nautical miles 185 kilometres 115 miles. Terminal controllers are responsible for providing all ATC services within their airspace.  Traffic flow is broadly divided into departures arrivals and overflights.  As aircraft move in and out of the terminal airspace they are handed off to the next appropriate control facility a control tower an enroute control facility or a bordering terminal or approach control.  Terminal control is responsible for ensuring that aircraft are at an appropriate altitude when they are handed off and that aircraft arrive at a suitable rate for landing. Not all airports have a radar approach or terminal control available.  In this case the enroute centre or a neighbouring terminal or approach control may coordinate directly with the tower on the airport and vector inbound aircraft to a position from where they can land visually.  At some of these airports the tower may provide a nonradar procedural approach service to arriving aircraft handed over from a radar unit before they are visual to land.  Some units also have a dedicated approach unit which can provide the procedural approach service either all the time or for any periods of radar outage for any reason. In the U.S. TRACONs are additionally designated by a threedigit alphanumeric code.  For example the Chicago TRACON is designated C90.  16  Area control centre  enroute centre  edit  Main article Area control center The training department at the Washington Air Route Traffic Control Center Leesburg Virginia  United States. Air traffic control also provides services to aircraft in flight between airports.  Pilots fly under one of two sets of rules for separation visual flight rules VFR or instrument flight rules IFR.  Air traffic controllers have different responsibilities to aircraft operating under the different sets of rules.  While IFR flights are under positive control in the US and Canada VFR pilots can request flight following radar advisories which provides traffic advisory services on a time permitting basis and may also provide assistance in avoiding areas of weather and flight restrictions as well as allowing pilots into the air traffic control system prior to the need to a clearance into certain airspace.  Throughout Europe pilots may request a  Flight Information Service  which is similar to flight following.  In the United Kingdom it is known as a basic service. Enroute air traffic controllers issue clearances and instructions for airborne aircraft and pilots are required to comply with these instructions.  Enroute controllers also provide air traffic control services to many smaller airports around the country including clearance off the ground and clearance for approach to an airport.  Controllers adhere to a set of separation standards that define the minimum distance allowed between aircraft.  These distances vary depending on the equipment and procedures used in providing ATC services. General characteristics  edit  Enroute air traffic controllers work in facilities called air traffic control centres each of which is commonly referred to as a centre.  The United States uses the equivalent term air route traffic control center.  Each centre is responsible for a given flight information region FIR.  Each flight information region typically covers many thousands of square miles of airspace and the airports within that airspace.  Centres control IFR aircraft from the time they depart from an airport or terminal areas airspace to the time they arrive at another airport or terminal areas airspace.  Centres may also pick up VFR aircraft that are already airborne and integrate them into their system.  These aircraft must continue under VFR flight rules until the centre provides a clearance. Centre controllers are responsible for issuing instructions to pilots to climb their aircraft to their assigned altitude while at the same time ensuring that the aircraft is properly separated from all other aircraft in its immediate area.  Additionally the aircraft must be placed in a flow consistent with the aircrafts route of flight.  This effort is complicated by crossing traffic severe weather special missions that require large airspace allocations and traffic density.  When the aircraft approaches its destination the centre is responsible for issuing instructions to pilots so that they will meet altitude restrictions by specific points as well as providing many destination airports with a traffic flow which prohibits all of the arrivals being bunched together.  These flow restrictions often begin in the middle of the route as controllers will position aircraft landing in the same destination so that when the aircraft are close to their destination they are sequenced. As an aircraft reaches the boundary of a centres control area it is handed off or handed over to the next area control centre .  In some cases this handoff process involves a transfer of identification and details between controllers so that air traffic control services can be provided in a seamless manner in other cases local agreements may allow silent handovers such that the receiving centre does not require any coordination if traffic is presented in an agreed manner.  After the handoff the aircraft is given a frequency change and its pilot begins talking to the next controller.  This process continues until the aircraft is handed off to a terminal controller approach. Radar coverage  edit  Since centres control a large airspace area they will typically use longrange radar that has the capability at higher altitudes to see aircraft within 200 nautical miles 370 kilometres 230 miles of the radar antenna.  They may also use radar data to control when it provides a better picture of the traffic or when it can fill in a portion of the area not covered by the long range radar. In the U.S. system at higher altitudes over 90 of the U.S. airspace is covered by radar and often by multiple radar systems however coverage may be inconsistent at lower altitudes used by aircraft due to high terrain or distance from radar facilities.  A centre may require numerous radar systems to cover the airspace assigned to them and may also rely on pilot position reports from aircraft flying below the floor of radar coverage.  This results in a large amount of data being available to the controller.  To address this automation systems have been designed that consolidate the radar data for the controller.  This consolidation includes eliminating duplicate radar returns ensuring the best radar for each geographical area is providing the data and displaying the data in an effective format. Unmanned radar on a remote mountain. Centres also exercise control over traffic travelling over the worlds ocean areas.  These areas are also flight information regions FIRs.  Because there are no radar systems available for oceanic control oceanic controllers provide ATC services using procedural control .  These procedures use aircraft position reports time altitude distance and speed to ensure separation.  Controllers record information on flight progress strips  and in specially developed oceanic computer systems as aircraft report positions.  This process requires that aircraft be separated by greater distances which reduces the overall capacity for any given route.  The North Atlantic Track system is a notable example of this method. Some air navigation service providers e.g. Airservices Australia the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration Nav Canada  etc. have implemented automatic dependent surveillance  broadcast ADSB as part of their surveillance capability.  This newer technology reverses the radar concept.  Instead of radar finding a target by interrogating the transponder the ADSB equipped aircraft broadcasts a position report as determined by the navigation equipment on board the aircraft.  ADSC is another mode of automatic dependent surveillance however ADSC operates in the contract mode where the aircraft reports a position automatically or initiated by the pilot based on a predetermined time interval.  It is also possible for controllers to request more frequent reports to more quickly establish aircraft position for specific reasons.  However since the cost for each report is charged by the ADS service providers to the company operating the aircraft  disputed  discuss  more frequent reports are not commonly requested except in emergency situations.  ADSC is significant because it can be used where it is not possible to locate the infrastructure for a radar system e.g. over water.  Computerised radar displays are now being designed to accept ADSC inputs as part of their display.  17  This technology is currently used in portions of the North Atlantic and the Pacific by a variety of states who share responsibility for the control of this airspace. Precision approach radars PAR are commonly used by military controllers of air forces of several countries to assist the pilot in final phases of landing in places where instrument landing system and other sophisticated airborne equipment are unavailable to assist the pilots in marginal or near zero visibility conditions.  This procedure is also called a talkdown. A radar archive system RAS keeps an electronic record of all radar information preserving it for a few weeks.  This information can be useful for search and rescue .  When an aircraft has disappeared from radar screens a controller can review the last radar returns from the aircraft to determine its likely position.  For an example see the crash report in the following citation.  18  RAS is also useful to technicians who are maintaining radar systems. Flight traffic mapping  edit  The mapping of flights in realtime is based on the air traffic control system and volunteer ADSB receivers.  In 1991 data on the location of aircraft was made available by the Federal Aviation Administration to the airline industry.  The National Business Aviation Association NBAA the General Aviation Manufacturers Association the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association the Helicopter Association International and the National Air Transportation Association petitioned the FAA to make ASDI information available on a needtoknow basis.  Subsequently NBAA advocated the broadscale dissemination of air traffic data.  The Aircraft Situational Display to Industry  ASDI  system now conveys uptodate flight information to the airline industry and the public.  Some companies that distribute ASDI information are Flightradar24  FlightExplorer FlightView and FlyteComm.  Each company maintains a website that provides free updated information to the public on flight status.  Standalone programmes are also available for displaying the geographic location of airborne instrument flight rules IFR air traffic anywhere in the FAA air traffic system.  Positions are reported for both commercial and general aviation traffic. The programmes can overlay air traffic with a wide selection of maps such as geopolitical boundaries air traffic control centre boundaries high altitude jet routes satellite cloud and radar imagery. Problems  edit  Traffic  edit  Further information Air traffic flow management Intersecting contrails of aircraft over London an area of high air traffic. The daytoday problems faced by the air traffic control system are primarily related to the volume of air traffic demand placed on the system and weather.  Several factors dictate the amount of traffic that can land at an airport in a given amount of time.  Each landing aircraft must touch down slow and exit the runway  before the next aircraft crosses the approach end of the runway.  This process requires at least one and up to four minutes for each aircraft.  Allowing for departures between arrivals each runway can thus handle about 30 aircraft arrivals per hour.  A large airport with two arrival runways can handle about 60 arrivals per hour in good weather.  Problems arise when airlines schedule more arrivals into an airport than can be physically handled or when delays elsewhere cause groups of aircraft  that would otherwise be separated in time  to arrive simultaneously.  Aircraft must then be delayed in the air by holding over specified locations until they may be safely sequenced to the runway.  Up until the 1990s holding which has significant environmental and cost implications was a routine occurrence at many airports.  Advances in computers now allow the sequencing of aircraft hours in advance.  Thus aircraft may be delayed before they even take off by being given a slot or may reduce speed in flight and proceed more slowly thus significantly reducing the amount of holding. Air traffic control errors occur when the separation either vertical or horizontal between airborne aircraft falls below the minimum prescribed separation set for the domestic United States by the US Federal Aviation Administration.  Separation minimums for terminal control areas TCAs around airports are lower than enroute standards.  Errors generally occur during periods following times of intense activity when controllers tend to relax and overlook the presence of traffic and conditions that lead to loss of minimum separation.  19   textsource integrity  Weather  edit  Aircraft taking off from DallasFort Worth International Airport with the ATC tower in the background. Beyond runway capacity issues the weather is a major factor in traffic capacity.  Rain ice  snow or hail on the runway cause landing aircraft to take longer to slow and exit thus reducing the safe arrival rate and requiring more space between landing aircraft. Fog also requires a decrease in the landing rate.  These in turn increase airborne delay for holding aircraft.  If more aircraft are scheduled than can be safely and efficiently held in the air a ground delay programme may be established delaying aircraft on the ground before departure due to conditions at the arrival airport. In Area Control Centres a major weather problem is thunderstorms  which present a variety of hazards to aircraft.  Airborne aircraft will deviate around storms reducing the capacity of the enroute system by requiring more space per aircraft or causing congestion as many aircraft try to move through a single hole in a line of thunderstorms.  Occasionally weather considerations cause delays to aircraft prior to their departure as routes are closed by thunderstorms. Much money has been spent on creating software to streamline this process.  However at some ACCs air traffic controllers still record data for each flight on strips of paper and personally coordinate their paths.  In newer sites these flight progress strips have been replaced by electronic data presented on computer screens.  As new equipment is brought in more and more sites are upgrading away from paper flight strips. Congestion  edit  Constrained control capacity and growing traffic lead to flight cancellation and delays  In America delays caused by ATC grew by 69 between 2012 and 2017.  9  ATC staffing issues were a major factor in congestion.  20  In China the average delay per domestic flight spiked by 50 in 2017 to 15 minutes per flight. In Europe en route delays grew by 105 in 2018 due to a lack of capacity or staff 60 weather 25 or strikes 14 costing the European economy 17.6bn 20.8bn up by 28 on 2017. By then the market for airtraffic services was worth 14bn.  More efficient ATC could save 510 of aviation fuel by avoiding holding patterns and indirect airways .  9  The military takes 80 of Chinese airspace congesting the thin corridors open to airliners.  The United Kingdom closes its military airspace only during military exercises.  9  Call signs  edit  A prerequisite to safe air traffic separation is the assignment and use of distinctive call signs .  These are permanently allocated by ICAO on request usually to scheduled flights  and some air forces and other military services for military flights .  There are written call signs with a two or three letter combination followed by the flight number such as AAL872 or VLG1011.  As such they appear on flight plans and ATC radar labels.  There are also the audio or radiotelephony call signs used on the radio contact between pilots and air traffic control.  These are not always identical to their written counterparts.  An example of an audio call sign would be Speedbird 832 instead of the written BAW832.  This is used to reduce the chance of confusion between ATC and the aircraft.  By default the call sign for any other flight is the registration number or tail number in US parlance of the aircraft such as N12345 CGABC or ECIZD.  The short radiotelephony call signs for these tail numbers is the last three letters using the NATO phonetic alphabet e.g. ABC spoken alphabravocharlie for CGABC or the last three numbers e.g. threefourfive for N12345.  In the United States the prefix may be an aircraft type model or manufacturer in place of the first registration character for example N11842 could become Cessna 842.  21  This abbreviation is only allowed after communications have been established in each sector. Before around 1980 International Air Transport Association IATA and ICAO were using the same twoletter call signs.  Due to the larger number of new airlines after deregulation the ICAO established the threeletter call signs as mentioned above.  The IATA call signs are currently used in aerodromes on the announcement tables but are no longer used in air traffic control.  For example AA is the IATA call sign for American Airlines  the ATC equivalent is AAL.  Flight numbers in regular commercial flights are designated by the aircraft operator and identical call sign might be used for the same scheduled journey each day it is operated even if the departure time varies a little across different days of the week.  The call sign of the return flight often differs only by the final digit from the outbound flight.  Generally airline flight numbers are even if eastbound and odd if westbound.  In order to reduce the possibility of two call signs on one frequency at any time sounding too similar a number of airlines particularly in Europe have started using alphanumeric call signs that are not based on flight numbers e.g. DLH23LG spoken as Lufthansa twothreelimagolf  to prevent confusion between incoming DLH23 and outgoing DLH24 in the same frequency.  Additionally it is the right of the air traffic controller to change the audio call sign for the period the flight is in his sector if there is a risk of confusion usually choosing the aircraft registration identifier instead. Technology  edit  Many technologies are used in air traffic control systems. Primary and secondary radars are used to enhance a controllers situational awareness within their assigned airspace all types of aircraft send back primary echoes of varying sizes to controllers screens as radar energy is bounced off their skins and transponder equipped aircraft reply to secondary radar interrogations by giving an ID  Mode A  an altitude  Mode C  and  or a unique callsign  Mode S .  Certain types of weather may also register on the radar screen.  These inputs added to data from other radars are correlated to build the air situation.  Some basic processing occurs on the radar tracks such as calculating ground speed and magnetic headings. Usually a flight data processing system manages all the flight plan related data incorporating in a low or high degree the information of the track once the correlation between them flight plan and track is established.  All this information is distributed to modern operational display systems  making it available to controllers. The Federal Aviation Administration FAA has spent over US3 billion on software but a fully automated system is still yet to be achieved.  In 2002 the United Kingdom commissioned a new area control centre into service at the London Area Control Centre LACC at Swanwick in Hampshire relieving a busy suburban centre at West Drayton in Middlesex north of London Heathrow Airport .  Software from LockheedMartin predominates at the London Area Control Centre.  However the centre was initially troubled by software and communications problems causing delays and occasional shutdowns.  22  Some tools are available in different domains to help the controller further Flight data processing systems this is the system usually one per centre that processes all the information related to the flight the flight plan typically in the time horizon from gate to gate airport departure  arrival gates.  It uses such processed information to invoke other flight plan related tools such as e.g. Medium Term Conflict Detection MTCD  23  and distributes such processed information to all the stakeholders air traffic controllers collateral centres airports etc. Shortterm conflict alert STCA that checks possible conflicting trajectories in a time horizon of about two or three minutes or even less in approach context 35 seconds in the French Roissy  Orly approach centres  24   and alerts the controller prior to the loss of separation.  The algorithms used may also provide in some systems a possible vectoring solution that is the manner in which to turn descend increase  decrease speed or climb the aircraft in order to avoid infringing the minimum safety distance or altitude clearance. Minimum safe altitude warning MSAW a tool that alerts the controller if an aircraft appears to be flying too low to the ground or will impact terrain based on its current altitude and heading. System coordination SYSCO to enable controller to negotiate the release of flights from one sector to another. Area penetration warning APW to inform a controller that a flight will penetrate a restricted area. Arrival and departure manager to help sequence the takeoff and landing of aircraft. The departure manager DMAN a system aid for the ATC at airports that calculates a planned departure flow with the goal to maintain an optimal throughput at the runway reduce queuing at holding point and distribute the information to various stakeholders at the airport i.e. the airline ground handling and air traffic control ATC. The arrival manager AMAN a system aid for the ATC at airports that calculates a planned arrival flow with the goal to maintain an optimal throughput at the runway reduce arrival queuing and distribute the information to various stakeholders. Passive final approach spacing tool pFAST a CTAS tool provides runway assignment and sequence number advisories to terminal controllers to improve the arrival rate at congested airports.  pFAST was deployed and operational at five US TRACONs before being cancelled.  NASA research included an active FAST capability that also provided vector and speed advisories to implement the runway and sequence advisories. Converging runway display aid CRDA enables approach controllers to run two final approaches that intersect and make sure that go arounds are minimised. Center TRACON automation system CTAS a suite of human centred decision support tools developed by NASA Ames Research Center.  Several of the CTAS tools have been field tested and transitioned to the FAA for operational evaluation and use.  Some of the CTAS tools are traffic management advisor TMA passive final approach spacing tool pFAST collaborative arrival planning CAP directto D2 en route descent advisor EDA and multicenter TMA.  The software is running on Linux.  25  Traffic management advisor TMA a CTAS tool is an enroute decision support tool that automates time based metering solutions to provide an upper limit of aircraft to a TRACON from the centre over a set period of time.  Schedules are determined that will not exceed the specified arrival rate and controllers use the scheduled times to provide the appropriate delay to arrivals while in the enroute domain.  This results in an overall reduction in enroute delays and also moves the delays to more efficient airspace higher altitudes than occur if holding near the TRACON boundary which is required in order to prevent overloading the TRACON controllers.  TMA is operational at most enroute air route traffic control centres ARTCCs and continues to be enhanced to address more complex traffic situations e.g. adjacent centre metering ACM and en route departure capability EDC MTCD and URET In the US user request evaluation tool URET takes paper strips out of the equation for enroute controllers at ARTCCs by providing a display that shows all aircraft that are either in or currently routed into the sector. In Europe several MTCD tools are available iFACTS  National Air Traffic Services  VAFORIT  Deutsche Flugsicherung  new FDPS  Maastricht Upper Area Control .  The Single European Sky ATM Research SESAR  26  programme should soon launch new MTCD concepts. URET and MTCD provide conflict advisories up to 30 minutes in advance and have a suite of assistance tools that assist in evaluating resolution options and pilot requests. Mode S  provides a data downlink of flight parameters via secondary surveillance radars allowing radar processing systems and therefore controllers to see various data on a flight including airframe unique id 24bits encoded indicated airspeed and flight director selected level amongst others. Controllerpilot data link communications CPDLC allows digital messages to be sent between controllers and pilots avoiding the need to use radiotelephony.  It is especially useful in areas where difficulttouse HF radiotelephony was previously used for communication with aircraft e.g. oceans.  This is currently in use in various parts of the world including the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. ADSB  automatic dependent surveillance broadcast provides a data downlink of various flight parameters to air traffic control systems via the transponder 1090 MHz and reception of those data by other aircraft in the vicinity.  The most important is the aircrafts latitude longitude and level such data can be utilised to create a radarlike display of aircraft for controllers and thus allows a form of pseudoradar control to be done in areas where the installation of radar is either prohibitive on the grounds of low traffic levels or technically not feasible e.g. oceans.  This is currently in use in Australia Canada and parts of the Pacific Ocean and Alaska. Electronic flight progress strip system at São Paulo Intl. control tower  ground control. The electronic flight strip system estrip  a system of electronic flight strips replacing the existing paper strips is being used by several service providers such as Nav Canada MASUAC DFS DECEA.  Estrips allows controllers to manage electronic flight data online without paper strips reducing the need for manual functions creating new tools and reducing the ATCOs workload.  The firsts electronic flight strips systems were independently and simultaneously invented and implemented by Nav Canada and Saipher ATC in 1999.  The Nav Canada system known as EXCDS  27  and rebranded in 2011 to NAVCANstrips and Saiphers first generation system known as SGTC which is now being updated by its 2nd generation system the TATIC TWR.  DECEA in Brazil is the worlds largest user of tower estrips system ranging from very small airports up to the busiest ones taking the advantage of real time information and data collection from each of more than 150 sites for use in air traffic flow management ATFM billing and statistics. Screen content recording hardware or software based recording function which is part of most modern automation system and that captures the screen content shown to the ATCO.  Such recordings are used for a later replay together with audio recording for investigations and post event analysis.  28  Communication navigation surveillance  air traffic management  CNS  ATM  systems are communications navigation and surveillance systems employing digital technologies including satellite systems together with various levels of automation applied in support of a seamless global air traffic management system.  29  Air navigation service providers ANSPs and air traffic service providers ATSPs  edit  Main article Air Navigation Service Provider Azerbaijan  AzərAeroNaviqasiya Albania  Albcontrol Algeria  Etablissement National de la Navigation Aérienne ENNA Argentina  Empresa Argentina de Navegación Aérea EANA Armenia  Armenian Air Traffic Services ARMATS Australia  Airservices Australia government owned corporation and Royal Australian Air Force Austria  Austro Control Bangladesh  Civil Aviation Authority Bangladesh Belarus  Republican Unitary Enterprise Белаэронавигация Belarusian Air Navigation Belgium  Skeyes  Authority of Airways Bosnia and Herzegovina  Agencija za pružanje usluga u zračnoj plovidbi Bosnia and Herzegovina Air Navigation Services Agency Brazil  Departamento de Controle do Espaço Aéreo ATCATM Authority and ANAC  Agência Nacional de Aviação Civil Civil Aviation Authority Bulgaria  Air Traffic Services Authority Cambodia  Cambodia Air Traffic Services CATS Canada  Nav Canada  formerly provided by Transport Canada and Canadian Forces Cayman Islands  CIAA Cayman Islands Airports Authority Central America  Corporación Centroamericana de Servicios de Navegación Aérea Guatemala  Dirección General de Aeronáutica Civil DGAC El Salvador Honduras Nicaragua  Empresa Administradora Aeropuertos Internacionales EAAI Costa Rica  Dirección General de Aviación Civil Belize Chile  Dirección General de Aeronáutica Civil DGAC Colombia  Aeronáutica Civil Colombiana UAEAC Croatia  Hrvatska kontrola zračne plovidbe Croatia Control Ltd. Cuba  Instituto de Aeronáutica Civil de Cuba IACC Czech Republic  Řízení letového provozu ČR Cyprus  Department of Civil Aviation Denmark  Naviair Danish ATC Dominican Republic  Instituto Dominicano de Aviación Civil IDAC Dominican Institute of Civil Aviation Eastern Caribbean  Eastern Caribbean Civil Aviation Authority ECCAA Anguilla Antigua and Barbuda British Virgin Islands Dominica Grenada Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Ecuador  Dirección General de Aviación Civil DGAC General Direction of Civil Aviation government body Estonia  Estonian Air Navigation Services Europe  Eurocontrol European organisation for the safety of air navigation Fiji  Fiji Airports fully owned government commercial company Finland  Finavia France  Direction Générale de lAviation Civile  DGAC  Direction des Services de la Navigation Aérienne  DSNA  government body Georgia  SAKAERONAVIGATSIA Ltd. Georgian Air Navigation Germany  Deutsche Flugsicherung German ATC  stateowned company Greece  Hellenic Civil Aviation Authority HCAA Hong Kong  Civil Aviation Department CAD Hungary  HungaroControl Magyar Légiforgalmi Szolgálat Zrt. HungaroControl Hungarian Air Navigation Services Pte. Ltd. Co. Iceland  ISAVIA India  Airports Authority of India AAI under Ministry of Civil Aviation Government of India and Indian Air Force  Indonesia  AirNav Indonesia Iran  Iran Civil Aviation Organization ICAO Ireland  Irish Aviation Authority IAA Iraq  Iraqi Air Navigation  ICAA Israel  Israeli Airports Authority IIA Italy  ENAV SpA and Italian Air Force Jamaica  Jamaica Civil Aviation Authority JCAA Japan  Japan Civil Aviation Bureau JCAB Kenya  Kenya Civil Aviation Authority KCAA Latvia  LGS Latvian ATC Lithuania  ANS Lithuanian ATC Luxembourg  Administration de la navigation aérienne ANA  government administration Macedonia  DGCA Macedonian ATC Malaysia  Civil Aviation Authority of Malaysia CAAM Malta  Malta Air Traffic Services Ltd Mexico  Servicios a la Navegación en el Espacio Aéreo Mexicano Morocco  Office National Des Aeroports ONDA Nepal  Civil Aviation Authority of Nepal Netherlands  Luchtverkeersleiding Nederland LVNL Dutch ATC Eurocontrol Maastricht Upper Area Control Centre New Zealand  Airways New Zealand state owned enterprise Nigeria  Nigeria Civil Aviation Authority NCAA Norway  Avinor stateowned private company Oman  Directorate General of Meteorology  Air Navigation Government of Oman Pakistan  Civil Aviation Authority under Government of Pakistan  Peru  Centro de Instrucción de Aviación Civil CIAC Philippines  Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines CAAP under the Philippine Government Poland  Polish Air Navigation Services Agency PANSA Portugal  NAV Portuguese ATC Puerto Rico  Administracion Federal de Aviacion Romania  Romanian Air Traffic Services Administration ROMATSA Russia  Federal State Unitary Enterprise State ATM Corporation Saudi Arabia  Saudi Air Navigation Services SANS Seychelles  Seychelles Civil Aviation Authority SCAA Singapore  Civil Aviation Authority of Singapore CAAS Serbia  Serbia and Montenegro Air Traffic Services Agency Ltd. SMATSA Slovakia  Letové prevádzkové služby Slovenskej republiky Slovenia  Slovenia Control South Africa  Air Traffic and Navigation Services ATNS South Korea  Korea Office of Civil Aviation Spain  AENA now AENA S.A. Spanish Airports and ENAIRE ATC  ATSP  30  Sri Lanka  Airport  Aviation Services Sri Lanka Limited government owned company Sweden  LFV government body Switzerland  Skyguide Taiwan  ANWS  Civil Aeronautical Administration  Thailand  AEROTHAI Aeronautical Radio of Thailand Trinidad and Tobago  Trinidad and Tobago Civil Aviation Authority TTCAA Turkey  General Directorate of State Airports Authority DHMI United Arab Emirates  General Civil Aviation Authority GCAA United Kingdom  National Air Traffic Services NATS 49 stateowned publicprivate partnership civilian and military United States  Federal Aviation Administration FAA government body Ukraine  Ukrainian State Air Traffic Service Enterprise UkSATSE Venezuela  Instituto Nacional de Aeronautica Civil INAC Vietnam  Vietnam Air Traffic Management Corporation VATM  31  Zambia  Zambia Civil Aviation Authority ZCAA  32  Zimbabwe  Zimbabwe Civil Aviation Authority  33  Proposed changes  edit  In the United States some alterations to traffic control procedures are being examined The Next Generation Air Transportation System examines how to overhaul the United States national airspace system. Free flight is a developing air traffic control method that uses no centralised control e.g. air traffic controllers.  Instead parts of airspace are reserved dynamically and automatically in a distributed way using computer communication to ensure the required separation between aircraft.  34  In Europe the Single European Sky ATM Research SESAR  26  programme plans to develop new methods technologies procedures and systems to accommodate future 2020 and beyond air traffic needs.  In October 2018 European controller unions dismissed setting targets to improve ATC as a waste of time and effort as new technology could cut costs for users but threaten their jobs.  In April 2019 the EU called for a Digital European Sky focusing on cutting costs by including a common digitisation standard and allowing controllers to move to where they are needed instead of merging national ATCs as it would not solve all problems.  Single airtraffic control services in continentsized America and China does not alleviate congestion.  Eurocontrol tries to reduce delays by diverting flights to less busy routes flight paths across Europe were redesigned to accommodate the new airport in Istanbul which opened in April but the extra capacity will be absorbed by rising demand for air travel.  9  Wellpaid jobs in western Europe could move east with cheaper labour.  The average Spanish controller earn over 200000 a year over seven times the country average salary more than pilots and at least ten controllers were paid over 810000 1.1m a year in 2010.  French controllers spent a cumulative nine months on strike between 2004 and 2016.  9  Privatisation  edit  Many countries have also privatised or corporatised their air navigation service providers.  35  There are several models that can be used for ATC service providers.  The first is to have the ATC services be part of a government agency as is currently the case in the United States.  The problem with this model is that funding can be inconsistent and can disrupt the development and operation of services.  Sometimes funding can disappear when lawmakers cannot approve budgets in time.  Both proponents and opponents of privatisation recognise that stable funding is one of the major factors for successful upgrades of ATC infrastructure.  Some of the funding issues include sequestration and politicisation of projects.  36  Proponents argue that moving ATC services to a private corporation could stabilise funding over the long term which will result in more predictable planning and rollout of new technology as well as training of personnel. Another model is to have ATC services provided by a government corporation.  This model is used in Germany where funding is obtained through user fees.  Yet another model is to have a forprofit corporation operate ATC services.  This is the model used in the United Kingdom but there have been several issues with the system there including a largescale failure in December 2014 which caused delays and cancellations and has been attributed to costcutting measures put in place by this corporation.  In fact earlier that year the corporation owned by the German government won the bid to provide ATC services for Gatwick Airport in the United Kingdom.  The last model which is often the suggested model for the United States to transition to is to have a nonprofit organisation that would handle ATC services as is used in Canada.  37  The Canadian system is the one most often used as a model by proponents of privatisation.  Air traffic control privatisation has been successful in Canada with the creation of Nav Canada a private nonprofit organisation which has reduced costs and has allowed new technologies to be deployed faster due to the elimination of much of the bureaucratic red tape .  This has resulted in shorter flights and less fuel usage.  It has also resulted in flights being safer due to new technology.  Nav Canada is funded from fees that are collected from the airlines based on the weight of the aircraft and the distance flown.  38  Air traffic control is operated by national governments with few exceptions in the European Union  only Italy has private shareholders.  Privatisation does not guarantee lower prices the profit margin of MUAC was 70 in 2017 as there is no competition but governments could offer fixed terms concessions .  Australia Fiji and New Zealand run the upperairspace for the Pacific islands governments.  HungaroControl offers remote airport tower services from Budapest and since 2014 provides upper airspace management for Kosovo. ATC regulations in the United States  edit  The United States airspace is divided into 21 zones centres and each zone is divided into sectors.  Also within each zone are portions of airspace about 50 miles 80 kilometres in diameter called TRACON Terminal Radar Approach Control airspaces.  Within each TRACON airspace are a number of airports each of which has its own airspace with a 5 miles 8.0 kilometres radius. FAA control tower operators CTO  air traffic controllers use FAA Order 7110.65 as the authority for all procedures regarding air traffic.  39  See also  edit  Aviation portal Air traffic service Flight information service officer Flight planning ICAO recommendations on use of the International System of Units Forward air control Global airtraffic management RMCDE Tower en route control TEC List of tallest air traffic control towers in the United States References  edit   FAA 7110.65 211 . FAA.gov . Federal Aviation Authority . n.d. Archived from the original on 7 June 2010.  How air traffic control works . CAA.co.uk . UK Civil Aviation Authority . n.d. Archived from the original on 26 February 2021 . Retrieved 21 January 2021 .  Electronic Code of Federal Regulations eCFR . ECFR.gov . Electronic Code of Federal Regulations eCFR. n.d . Retrieved 21 January 2021 .  a b IDAO FAQ . ICAO.int . International Civil Aviation Organization . n.d. Archived from the original on 20 February 2009 . Retrieved 3 March 2009 .  Green Jersey Web Design. Heritage locations  South East  Surrey  Croydon Airport . Archived from the original on 25 September 2018 . Retrieved 3 July 2015 .  KaminskiMorrow David 25 February 2020. Colourised images mark centenary of worlds first control tower . Flight Global .  How a hut in Croydon changed air travel . BBC News . Retrieved 2 March 2020 .  FAA Historical Chronology 19261996  a b c d e f Airtraffic control is a mess . The Economist . 15 June 2019.  Costa G 1995 Occupational stress and stress prevention in air traffic  Geneva International Labour Office Working paper CONDITWP.61995  Arghami S Seraji JN Mohammad K Zamani GH Farhangi A Van Vuuren W 2005 Mental health in hightech system  Iranian Journal of Public Health. 2005317.  CANSO Guidance Material for Remote and Digital Towers PDF . Civil Air Navigation Services Organisation CANSO. January 2021. p. 5 . Retrieved 23 August 2023 .  Guidance Material on remote aerodrome air traffic services . European Union Aviation Safety Agency EASA. 15 February 2019 . Retrieved 23 August 2023 .  Thirteenth Air Navigation Conference Montréal Canada 9 to 19 October 2018 Committee A Agenda item 3 Enhancing the global air navigation system 3.5 Other ATM issues Digitisation of Aerodrome Air Traffic Services PDF . International Civil Aviation Organization ICAO. 919 October 2018 . Retrieved 23 August 2023 .  a b c d Smith David 2021. Air Traffic Control Handbook . Manchester  England Crécy Publishing Ltd. ISBN 9781910809990 .  Terminal Radar Approach Control Facilities TRACON . FAA.gov . Federal Aviation Administration . Retrieved 22 February 2014 .  Automatic Dependent Surveillance  Contract ADSC . SKYbrary.aero . SKYbrary Aviation Safety . Retrieved 23 February 2021 .  crash report . TSB.gc.ca . 1996. Archived from the original on 7 March 2012 . Retrieved 24 August 2010 .  Breitler Alan Kirk Kevin September 1996 Effects of Sector Complexity and Controller Experience on Probability of Operational Errors in Air Route Traffic Control Centers  Center for Naval Analyses Document IPR 950092  Gilbert Trish 15 June 2016. Air traffic control staffing shortage must be addressed . The Hill . Retrieved 12 August 2022 .  What is an abbreviated aircraft call sign . ATC Communication . Archived from the original on 20 October 2018 . Retrieved 3 July 2015 .  Air Traffic Control . sites.Google.com . Retrieved 4 December 2012 .  Medium Term Conflict Detection MTCD . skybrary.aero . SKYbrary Aviation Safety . Retrieved 3 November 2024 .  Le filet de sauvegarde resserre ses mailles PDF . dgac.fr in French. Archived from the original PDF on 27 March 2009.  Technical Sessions . usenix.org . Retrieved 5 December 2010 .  a b SESAR . Eurocontrol.int . Eurocontrol . Archived from the original on 25 September 2008.  Technology Solutions  Integrated Information Display System IIDS  Extended Computer Display System EXCDS . Nav Canada . Archived from the original on 16 June 2004.  Solutions using Epiphan products . Epiphan Video capture stream record . Archived from the original on 15 February 2014 . Retrieved 3 July 2015 .  CNSATM SYSTEMS PDF . icao.int . p. 10. Archived from the original PDF on 9 November 2011.  Acerca de ENAIRE  ENAIRE  Información corporativa . Archived from the original on 4 July 2015 . Retrieved 3 July 2015 .  Company profile  Viet Nam Air Traffic Management Corporation . VATM.vn . Retrieved 23 January 2024 .  permanent dead link    Zambia Civil Aviation Authority  home . CAA.co.zm . Archived from the original on 2 August 2019 . Retrieved 2 August 2019 .  Civil Aviation Authority of Zimbabwe . www.caaz.co.zw . Archived from the original on 29 June 2019 . Retrieved 9 May 2021 .  Leslie Jacques. Wired 4.04 Free Flight . Wired . Retrieved 3 July 2015 .  McDougall Glen Roberts Alasdair S 15 August 2007. Commercialising Air Traffic Control Have the reforms worked. Canadian Public Administration Vol. 51 No. 1 pp. 4569 2009. SSRN 1317450 .  cite journal   Cite journal requires journal  help   American Federation of Government Employees et al. FAA Labor Unions Oppose ATC Privatization PDF . Professional Aviation Safety Specialists . Retrieved 25 November 2016 .  permanent dead link    Rinaldi Paul 2015. Safety and Efficiency Must Remain the Main Mission. The Journal of Air Traffic Control . 57 2 21 23.  Crichton John 2015. The NAV CANADA Model. The Journal of Air Traffic Control . 57 2 33 35.  Air Traffic Plans and Publications PDF . FAA.gov . Archived PDF from the original on 10 May 2009 . Retrieved 5 December 2010 . External links  edit  Wikimedia Commons has media related to Air traffic control . U.S. Centennial of Flight Commission  Air Traffic Control The short film A TRAVELER MEETS AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL 1963 is available for free viewing and download at the Internet Archive . NASA video of US air traffic Radar antennas in air traffic management  YouTube video part of a video series about radar basics v t e Air traffic control Enroute ERAM Terminal STARS Common ARTS Ground ASDEX ASSC v t e Commercial aviation Airlines Airline codes Airline holding companies Cargo airline Charter airlines Flag carriers Lowcost airlines Nonscheduled airline Passenger airlines Regional airlines Alliances Oneworld SkyTeam Star Alliance Value Alliance Vanilla Alliance UFLY Alliance Trade groups International ACO ATAG IATA IATAN IFALPA ISTAT United States A4A RAA Europe A4E ASD ECA EBAA ERA ETWF Other regions AACO AAPA AFRAA RAAA Aircrew Pilot in command Captain First officer Second officer Third officer Relief crew Flight attendant Flight engineer Loadmaster Aircraft pilot Purser Dead mileage Airliner Travel class First class Business class Premium economy class Economy class Basic economy class Aircraft cabin Aircraft lavatory Aircraft seat map Airline meal Airline seat Buy on board Crew rest compartment Inflight entertainment Inflight smoking Galley Sickness bag Airport Aerodrome Airline hub Airport checkin Airport lounge Airport rail link Airport terminal Airside pass Airstair Boarding Domestic airport Gate International airport Jet bridge Lowcost carrier terminal Runway Transit hotel Customs  Immigration Arrival card Border control  internal  Departure card Passport Timatic Travel document Travel visa Electronic Environmental effects Hypermobility Environmental effects of aviation Law Air transport agreement Air route authority between the United States and China Bermuda Agreement UKUS 19461978 Bermuda II Agreement UKUS 19782008 Crossstrait charter Beijing Convention Cape Town Treaty Chicago Convention Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives European Common Aviation Area Flight permit Freedoms of the air EUUS Open Skies Agreement Hague Hijacking Convention Hague Protocol Montreal Convention Paris Convention of 1919 Rome Convention Sabotage Convention Tokyo Convention Warsaw Convention Intergovernmental organizations ICAO ECAC Eurocontrol EASA ENCASIA Baggage Bag tag Baggage allowance Baggage carousel Baggage cart Baggage reclaim Baggage handler Baggage handling system Baggage sizer Checked baggage Hand luggage Lost luggage  WorldTracer  Luggage lock Aviation safety Air rage Air traffic control Air traffic service Aircraft safety card Airport authority Airport crash tender Airport police Airport security Airspace class Area control center Brace position Civil aviation authority Control area Control zone Controlled airspace Evacuation slide Flight information region Flight information service Flight recorder Instrument flight rules Overwing exits Preflight safety demonstration Sky marshal Special use airspace Special visual flight rules Terminal control area Terminal control center Uncontrolled airspace Upper information region Visual flight rules Airline tickets Airline booking ploys Airline reservations system Airline ticket Airline timetable Bereavement flight Boarding pass Codeshare agreement Continent pass Electronic ticket Fare basis code Flight cancellation and delay Frequentflyer program Government contract flight Oneway travel Openjaw ticket Overbooking  Overselling  Passenger name record Redeye flight Roundtheworld ticket Standby Tracking Travel agency Travel website Ground crew Aircraft maintenance technician Aircraft ground handling Baggage handler Flight dispatcher Miscellaneous Air cargo Air travel Aviation taxation and subsidies Mile high club Authority control databases National Japan Other NARA