Vehicle safety device This article is about a car safety device. For other uses see Airbag disambiguation . The driver and passenger front airbag modules after having been deployed in a Peugeot 306 An airbag is a vehicle occupantrestraint system using a bag designed to inflate in milliseconds during a collision and then deflate afterwards.  1  It consists of an airbag cushion a flexible fabric bag an inflation module and an impact sensor. The purpose of the airbag is to provide a vehicle occupant with soft cushioning and restraint during a collision. It can reduce injuries between the flailing occupant and the vehicles interior. The airbag provides an energyabsorbing surface between the vehicles occupants and a steering wheel instrument panel body pillar  headliner and windshield . Modern vehicles may contain up to ten airbag modules in various configurations including driver passenger sidecurtain seatmounted doormounted B and Cpillar mounted sideimpact knee bolster inflatable seat belt and pedestrian airbag modules. During a crash the vehicles crash sensors provide crucial information to the airbag electronic controller unit ECU including collision type angle and severity of impact. Using this information the airbag ECUs crash algorithm determines if the crash event meets the criteria for deployment and triggers various firing circuits to deploy one or more airbag modules within the vehicle. Airbag module deployments are activated through a pyrotechnic process designed to be used once as a supplemental restraint system for the vehicles seat belt systems. Newer sideimpact airbag modules consist of compressedair cylinders that are triggered in the event of a sideon vehicle impact.  2  The first commercial designs were introduced in passenger automobiles during the 1970s with limited success and caused some fatalities.  3  Broad commercial adoption of airbags occurred in many markets during the late 1980s and early 1990s. Many modern vehicles now include six or more units.  4  Active vs. passive safety  edit  Airbags are considered passive restraints and act as a supplement to active restraints. Because no action by a vehicle occupant is required to activate or use the airbag it is considered a passive device. This is in contrast to seat belts  which are considered active devices because the vehicle occupant must act to enable them.  5   6   7   8  This terminology is not related to active and passive safety  which are respectively systems designed to prevent collisions in the first place and systems designed to minimize the effects of collisions once they occur. In this use a car Antilock braking system qualifies as an activesafety device while both its seat belts and airbags qualify as passivesafety devices. Terminological confusion can arise from the fact that passive devices and systemsthose requiring no input or action by the vehicle occupantcan operate independently in an active manner an airbag is one such device. Vehicle safety professionals are generally careful in their use of language to avoid this sort of confusion. However advertising principles sometimes prevent such semantic caution in the consumer marketing of safety features. Further confusing the terminology the aviation safety community uses the terms active and passive in the opposite sense from the automotive industry.  9  History  edit  Blue plaque commemorating Round and Parrotts patent at Birmingham Dental Hospital John W. Hetricks 1953 safety cushion patent drawing  10  1975 Buick Electra with ACRS A deployed curtain airbag in an Opel Vectra Origins  edit  The airbag for the covering of aeroplane and other vehicle parts traces its origins to a United States patent submitted in 1919 by two dentists from Birmingham  Arthur Parrott and Harold Round.  11  The patent was approved in 1920.  12  Airfilled bladders were in use as early as 1951.  13   14  The airbag specifically for automobile use is credited independently to the American John W. Hetrick  who filed for an airbag patent on 5 August 1952 that was granted 2649311 by the United States Patent Office on 18 August 1953.  15   16   17  German engineer Walter Linderer who filed German patent 896312 on 6 October 1951 was issued on 12 November 1953 approximately three months after American John Hetrick. The airbags proposed by Hetrick and Linderer were based on compressed air released by a spring bumper contact or by the driver. Later research during the 1960s showed that compressed air could not inflate the mechanical airbags fast enough to ensure maximum safety leading to the current chemical and electrical airbags.  18   19  In patent applications manufacturers sometimes use the term inflatable occupant restraint systems. Hetrick was an industrial engineer and member of the United States Navy . His airbag design however only came about when he combined his experiences working with navy torpedoes with his desire to protect his family on the road. Despite working with the major automobile manufacturers of his time Hetrick was unable to attract investment.  20   21  Although airbags are now required in every automobile sold in the United States Hetricks 1951 patent filing serves as an example of a valuable invention with little economic value to its inventor. Its first commercial use was not implemented until after the patent expired in 1971 at which point the airbag was installed in a few experimental Ford cars.  22  In 1964 a Japanese automobile engineer Yasuzaburou Kobori 小堀保三郎 started developing an airbag safety net system. His design harnessed an explosive to inflate an airbag for which he was later awarded patents in 14 countries. He died in 1975 before seeing the widespread adoption of airbag systems.  23   24   25  In 1967 a breakthrough in developing airbag crash sensors came when Allen K. Breed invented a ballintube mechanism for crash detection. Under his system an electromechanical sensor with a steel ball attached to a tube by a magnet would inflate an airbag in under 30 milliseconds.  26  A small explosion of sodium azide was used instead of compressed air during inflation for the first time.  19  Breed Corporation then marketed this innovation to Chrysler . A similar AutoCeptor crashrestraint developed by the Eaton Yale  Towne company for Ford was soon also offered as an automatic safety system in the United States  27   28  while the Italian EatonLivia company offered a variant with localized  further explanation needed  air cushions.  29  In the early 1970s General Motors began offering cars equipped with airbags initially in government fleetpurchased 1973 Chevrolet Impala sedans. These cars came with a 1974style Oldsmobile instrument panel and a unique steering wheel that contained the driverside airbag. Two of these cars were crash tested after 20 years and the airbags deployed perfectly.  30  An early example of the airbag cars survives as of 2009.  31  GMs Oldsmobile Toronado was the first domestic U.S. vehicle to include a passenger airbag in 1973.  32  General Motors marketed its first airbag modules under the Air Cushion Restraint System name or ACRS. The automaker discontinued the option for its 1977 model year  citing a lack of consumer interest. Ford and GM then spent years lobbying against airbag requirements claiming that the devices were unfeasible and inappropriate. Chrysler made driverside airbags standard on 1988 and 1989 models but airbags did not become widespread in American cars until the early 1990s.  33  As a substitute for seat belts  edit  Airbags for passenger cars were introduced in the United States in the 1970s. When seatbelt usage rates in the country were quite low compared to modernday Ford built experimental cars with airbags in 1971. Allstate operated a fleet of 200 Mercury Montereys and showed the reliability of airbags as well as their operation in crash testing which also was promoted by the insurance company in popular magazine advertisements.  34  General Motors followed in 1973 using fullsized Chevrolet vehicles. The early fleet of experimental GM vehicles equipped with airbags experienced seven fatalities one of which was later suspected to have been caused by the airbag.  35  In 1974 GM made its ACRS system which consisted of a padded lower dashboard and a passengerside air bag available as a regular production option RPO code AR3 in fullsized Cadillac  36  Buick and Oldsmobile models. The GM cars from the 1970s equipped with ACRS had a driverside airbag and a driverside knee restraint.  37  The passengerside airbag protected both front passengers  37  and unlike most modern systems integrated a knee and torso cushion while also having a dualstage deployment dictated by force of the impact. The cars equipped with ACRS had lap belts for all seating positions but lacked shoulder belts. Shoulder belts were already mandatory in the United States on closed cars without airbags for the driver and outer front passenger but GM chose to market its airbags as a substitute for shoulder belts. Prices for this option on Cadillac models were US225 in 1974 300 in 1975 and 340 in 1976 US1820 in 2023 dollars  38  . The early development of airbags coincided with international interest in automobile safety legislation. Some safety experts advocated a performancebased occupantprotection standard rather than one mandating a particular technical solution which could rapidly become outdated and prove to not be a costeffective approach. Less emphasis was placed on other designs as countries successfully mandated seat belt restrictions however.  29  As a supplemental restraint system  edit  Frontal airbag  edit  Three photos of a crash test dummy whose head lands right into the airbag The auto industry and research and regulatory communities have moved away from their initial view of the airbag as a seatbelt replacement and the bags are now nominally designated as supplemental restraint systems  SRS  or supplemental inflatable restraints. In 1981 MercedesBenz introduced the airbag in West Germany as an option on its flagship saloon model SClass W126 . In the Mercedes system the sensors automatically tensioned the seat belts to reduce occupants motion on impact and then deployed the airbag on impact. This integrated the seat belts and the airbag into a restraint system rather than the airbag being considered an alternative to the seat belt. In 1987 the Porsche 944 Turbo became the first car to have driver and passenger airbags as standard equipment.  39  The Porsche 944 and 944S had this as an available option. The same year also had the first airbag in a Japanese car the Honda Legend .  40  In 1988 Chrysler became the first United States automaker to fit a driverside airbag as standard equipment which was offered in six different models.  41   42  The following year Chrysler became the first US auto manufacturer to offer driverside airbags in all its new passenger models.  43   44  Chrysler also began featuring the airbags in advertisements showing how the devices had saved lives that helped the public know the value of them and safety became a selling advantage in the late 1980s.  45  All versions of the Chrysler minivans came with airbags starting for the 1991 model year.  41  In 1993 The Lincoln Motor Company boasted that all vehicles in their model line were equipped with dual airbags one for the drivers side and another for the passengers side.  46  The 1993 Jeep Grand Cherokee became the first SUV to offer a driverside airbag when it was launched in 1992.  47  Driver and passenger airbags became standard equipment in all Dodge Intrepid  Eagle Vision  and Chrysler Concorde sedans ahead of any safety regulations.  48   49  Early 1993 saw the 4millionth airbagequipped Chrysler vehicle roll off the assembly line.  50  In October 1993 the Dodge Ram became the first pickup truck with a standard driverside airbag.  51  The first known collision between two airbagequipped automobiles took place on 12 March 1990 in Virginia  USA. A 1989 Chrysler LeBaron crossed the center line and hit another 1989 Chrysler LeBaron in a headon collision  causing both driver airbags to deploy. The drivers suffered only minor injuries despite extensive damage to the vehicles.  52   53   54  The United States Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991 required passenger cars and light trucks built after 1 September 1998 to have airbags for the driver and the front passenger.  55   56  In the United States NHTSA estimated that airbags had saved over 4600 lives by 1 September 1999 however the crash deployment experience of the early 1990s installations indicated that some fatalities and serious injuries were in fact caused by airbags.  55  In 1998 NHTSA initiated new rules for advanced airbags that gave automakers more flexibility in devising effective technological solutions. The revised rules also required improved protection for occupants of different sizes regardless of whether they use seat belts while minimizing the risk to infants children and other occupants caused by airbags.  55  In Europe  airbags were almost unheard of until the early 1990s. By 1991 four manufacturers  BMW  Honda  MercedesBenz and Volvo  offered the airbag on some of their higherend models but shortly afterward airbags became a common feature on more mainstream cars with Ford and Vauxhall  Opel among the manufacturers to introduce the airbag to its model ranges in 1992. Citroën  Fiat  Nissan  Hyundai  Peugeot  Renault  and Volkswagen followed shortly afterwards. By 1999 finding a new massmarket car without an airbag at least as optional equipment was difficult and some late 1990s products such as the Volkswagen Golf Mk4  also featured side airbags. The Peugeot 306 is one example of the European automotive massmarket evolution starting in early 1993 most of these models did not even offer a drivers airbag as an option but by 1999 even side airbags were available on several variants. Audi was late to offer airbag systems on a broader scale since even in the 1994 model year its popular models did not offer airbags. Instead the German automaker until then relied solely on its proprietary cablebased proconten restraint system. Variable forcedeployment front airbags were developed to help minimize injury from the airbag itself. The emergence of the airbag has contributed to a sharp decline in the number of deaths and serious injuries on the roads of Europe since 1990 and by 2010 the number of cars on European roads lacking an airbag represented a very small percentage of cars mostly the remaining cars dating from the mid1990s or earlier. Many new cars in Latin America including the Kia Rio  Kia Picanto  Hyundai Grand i10  Mazda 2  Chevrolet Spark and the Chevrolet Onix  are often sold without airbags as neither airbags nor automatic braking systems in new cars are compulsory in many Latin American countries. Some require the installation of a minimum of only two airbags in new cars which many in this market have.  57   58   59  Shape of airbags  edit  The Citroën C4 provided the first shaped driver airbag made possible by this cars unusual fixedhub steering wheel.  60  In 2019 Honda announced it would introduce a new front passenger airbag technology. Developed by Autoliv and Honda RD in Ohio United States  this new airbag design features three inflatable chambers connected across the front by a noninflatable sail panel. The two outer chambers are larger than the middle chamber. When the airbag deploys the sail panel cushions the occupants head from the impact of hitting the airbag and the three chambers hold the occupants head in place like a catchers mitt. The goal of the trichamber airbag is to help arrest highspeed movement of the head thereby reducing the likelihood of concussion injuries in a collision. The first vehicle to come with the trichamber airbag installed from the factory was in 2020 for the 2021 model year for the Acura TLX . Honda hopes that the new technology will soon make its way to all vehicles.  61  Rear airbag  edit  Mercedes began offering rear passengers protection in frontal collisions in September 2020 for the 2021 model year for the MercedesBenz SClass W223 .  62  The W223 SClass is the first car equipped with rear seat airbags that use gas to inflate supporting structures that unfold and extend a bag that fills with ambient air instead of conventional fully gasinflated airbags that are widely used in automotive airbag systems.  63   64  Side airbag  edit  Side airbag on a Porsche 996 inflated permanently for display purposes Deployed curtain airbag and side torso airbag in a Citroën C4 Essentially two types of side airbags are commonly used today  when   the sidetorso airbag and the sidecurtain airbag. More recently  when  center airbags are becoming more common in the European market. Most vehicles equipped with sidecurtain airbags also include sidetorso airbags. However some such as the Chevrolet Cobalt   65  200709 model Chevrolet SilveradoGMC Sierra  and 200912 Dodge Ram  66  do not feature the sidetorso airbag. From around 2000 sideimpact airbags became commonplace on even low to midrange vehicles such as the smallerengined versions of the Ford Fiesta and Peugeot 206  and curtain airbags were also becoming regular features on massmarket cars. The Toyota Avensis  launched in 2003 was the first massmarket car to be sold in Europe with nine airbags. Side torso airbag  edit  Sideimpact airbags or sidetorso airbags  are a category of airbags usually located in the seat  67  or door panel  68  and inflate between the seat occupant and the door. These airbags are designed to reduce the risk of injury to the pelvic and lower abdomen regions.  69  Most vehicles are now being equipped with different types of designs to help reduce injury and ejection from the vehicle in rollover crashes. More recent sideairbag designs  70  include a twochamber system  71  a firmer lower chamber for the pelvic region and softer upper chamber for the ribcage.  72   73  Swedish company Autoliv AB was granted a patent on sideimpact airbags and they were first offered as an option in 1994  74  on the 1995 Volvo 850  and as standard equipment on all Volvo cars made after 1995.  74  In 1997 Saab introduced the first combined head and torso airbags with the launch of the Saab 95 . Some cars such as the 2010 Volkswagen Polo Mk.5 have combined head and torsoside airbags. These are fitted in the backrest of the front seats and protect the head and the torso. Side tubular or curtain airbag  edit  In 1997 the BMW 7 Series and 5 Series were fitted with tubularshaped head side airbags inflatable tubular structure  75  the Head Protection System HPS as standard equipment.  76  This airbag was designed to offer head protection in side impact collisions and also maintained inflation for up to seven seconds for rollover protection. However this tubularshaped airbag design has been quickly replaced by an inflatable curtain airbag. In May 1998 Toyota began offering a sidecurtain airbag deploying from the roof on the Progrés .  77  In 1998 the Volvo S80 was given roofmounted curtain airbags to protect both front and rear passengers.  78  Curtain airbags were then made standard equipment on all new Volvo cars from 2000 except for the firstgeneration C70  which received an enlarged sidetorso airbag that also protects the head of frontseat occupants.  74  The secondgeneration C70 convertible received the worlds first doormounted sidecurtain airbags that deployed upwards. Curtain airbags have been said to reduce brain injury or fatalities by up to 45 in a side impact with an SUV. These airbags come in various forms e.g. tubular curtain doormounted depending on the needs of the application.  79  Many recent SUVs and MPVs have a long inflatable curtain airbag that protects all rows of seats. In many vehicles the curtain airbags are programmed to deploy during someall frontal impacts to manage passenger kinetics e.g. head hitting Bpillar on the rebound especially in offset crashes such as the IIHSs small overlap crash test. Rollsensing curtain airbag RSCA  edit  Rollsensing curtain airbags are designed to stay inflated for a longer duration of time cover a larger proportion of the window and be deployed in a rollover crash. They offer protection to occupants heads and help to prevent ejection. SUVs and pickups are more likely to be equipped with RSCAs due to their higher probability of rolling over and often a switch can disable the feature in case the driver wants to take the vehicle offroad. Center airbag  edit  This section needs to be updated . Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.  February 2019  Frontcenter airbag of a Chevrolet Traverse deployed in a static outofposition test The purpose of the test was to find out how this airbag affects a 3yearold child who is out of his seat and in the direct reach of the airbag. Ford seat belt airbag In 2009 Toyota developed the first production rearseat center airbag designed to reduce the severity of secondary injuries to rear passengers in a side collision. This system deploys from the rear center seat first appearing in on the Crown Majesta .  80  In late 2012 General Motors with supplier Takata introduced a front center airbag it deploys from the drivers seat.  81  Hyundai Motor Group announced its development of a centerside airbag on September 18 2019 installed inside the drivers seat. Some Volkswagen vehicles in 2022 equipped with center airbags include the ID.3 and the Golf .  82  The Polestar 2 also includes a center airbag. With EuroNCAP updating its testing guidelines in 2020 European and Australian market vehicles increasingly use frontcenter airbags rear torso airbags and rear seat belt pretensioners.  83  Knee airbag  edit  The second driverside and separate knee airbag was used in the Kia Sportage SUV and has been standard equipment since then. The airbag is located beneath the steering wheel.  84   85  Deployed passenger knee airbag in a Toyota Tundra after a frontal collision test the driverside knee airbag was also deployed. Blue and yellow markings indicate the dummys knees. The Toyota Caldina introduced the first driverside SRS knee airbag on the Japanese market in 2002.  86  Toyota Avensis became the first vehicle sold in Europe equipped with a drivers knee airbag.  87   88  The EuroNCAP reported on the 2003 Avensis There has been much effort to protect the drivers knees and legs and a knee airbag worked well.  89  Since then certain models have also included frontpassenger knee airbags which deploy near or over the glove compartment in a crash. Knee airbags are designed to reduce leg injury. The knee airbag has become increasingly common since 2000. Rear curtain airbag  edit  In 2008 the new Toyota iQ microcar featured the first production rearcurtain shield airbag to protect the rear occupants heads in the event of a rearend impact.  90  Seat cushion airbag  edit  Another feature of the Toyota iQ was a seatcushion airbag in the passenger seat to prevent the pelvis from diving below the lap belt during a frontal impact or submarining.  91  Later Toyota models such as the Yaris added the feature to the drivers seat as well. Seatbelt airbag  edit  The seatbelt airbag is designed to better distribute the forces experienced by a buckled person in a crash using an increased seat belt area. This is done to reduce possible injuries to the rib cage or chest of the belt wearer. 2010 Ford Explorer  92  and 2013 Ford Flex  optional rear seat belt airbags standard on the 2013 Lincoln MKT 2010 Lexus LFA  93  had seat belt airbags for driver and passenger  94  2013 MercedesBenz SClass W222 has rear seat belt bags  95  2014 Ford Mondeo Mk IV  96  has optional rear seat belt airbags for the two outer seats  97  Cessna Aircraft  98  also introduced seat belt airbags.  99  They are as of 2003  99  standard on the 172 182 and 206. Pedestrian airbag  edit  Airbags mounted to the exterior of vehicles socalled pedestrian airbags are designed to reduce injuries in the event of a vehicle to a pedestrian collision.  100  When a collision is detected the airbag will deploy and cover hard areas such as apillars  101  and bonnet edges before they can be struck by the pedestrian.  102  When introduced in 2012 the Volvo V40 included the worlds first pedestrian airbag as standard.  103  As a result the V40 ranked highest 88 in the EuroNCAPs pedestrian tests.  104  Manufacturers  edit  Suppliers of SRS airbags include Autoliv  Daicel  TRW  and JSS which owns Breed Key Safety Systems and Takata. The majority of impact sensors of airbags are manufactured by the Lanka Harness Company.  citation needed  Operation  edit  This section needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.  May 2016   Learn how and when to remove this message  An ACU from a Geo Storm The airbags in the vehicle are controlled by a central airbag control unit  105  ACU a specific type of ECU . The ACU monitors several related sensors within the vehicle including accelerometers  impact sensors side door pressure sensors  106   107  wheel speed sensors  gyroscopes  brake pressure sensors  and seat occupancy sensors. Oftentimes ACUs log thisand othersensor data in a circular buffer and record it to onboard nonvolatile memory to provide a snapshot of the crash event for investigators. As such an ACU frequently functions as the vehicles event data recorder  not all EDRs are ACUs and not all ACUs include EDR features.  108   15 An ACU typically includes capacitors within its circuitry so that the module remains powered and able to deploy the airbags if the vehicles battery connection to the ACU is severed during a crash.  108   102  109   3 The bag itself and its inflation mechanism are concealed within the steering wheel boss for the driver or the dashboard for the front passenger behind plastic flaps or doors that are designed to tear open under the force of the bag inflating. Once the requisite threshold has been reached or exceeded the airbag control unit will trigger the ignition of a gas generator propellant to rapidly inflate a fabric bag. As the vehicle occupant collides with and squeezes the bag the gas escapes in a controlled manner through small vent holes. The airbags volume and the size of the vents in the bag are tailored to each vehicle type to spread out the deceleration of and thus force experienced by the occupant over time and over the occupants body compared to a seat belt alone. The signals from the various sensors are fed into the airbag control unit which determines from them the angle of impact the severity or the force of the crash along with other variables. Depending on the result of these calculations the ACU may also deploy various additional restraint devices such as seat belt pretensioners andor airbags including frontal bags for driver and front passenger along with seatmounted side bags and curtain airbags which cover the side glass. Each restraint device is typically activated with one or more pyrotechnic devices commonly called an initiator or electric match . The electric match which consists of an electrical conductor wrapped in a combustible material activates with a current pulse between 1 and 3 amperes in less than 2 milliseconds. When the conductor becomes hot enough it ignites the combustible material which initiates the gas generator. In a seat belt pretensioner this hot gas is used to drive a piston that pulls the slack out of the seat belt. In an airbag the initiator is used to ignite solid propellant inside the airbag inflator. The burning propellant generates inert gas which rapidly inflates the airbag in approximately 20 to 30 milliseconds. An airbag must inflate quickly to be fully inflated by the time the forwardtraveling occupant reaches its outer surface. Typically the decision to deploy an airbag in a frontal crash is made within 15 to 30 milliseconds after the onset of the crash and both the driver and passenger airbags are fully inflated within approximately 6080 milliseconds after the first moment of vehicle contact. If an airbag deploys too late or too slowly the risk of occupant injury from contact with the inflating airbag may increase. Since more distance typically exists between the passenger and the instrument panel the passenger airbag is larger and requires more gas to fill it. Older airbag systems contained a mixture of sodium azide NaN 3  KNO 3  and SiO 2 . A typical driverside airbag contains approximately 5080 g of NaN 3  with the larger passengerside airbag containing about 250 g. Within about 40 milliseconds of impact all these components react in three separate reactions that produce nitrogen gas. The reactions in order are as follows. 2 NaN 3  2 Na  3 N 2 g 10 Na  2 KNO 3  K 2 O  5 Na 2 O  N 2 g K 2 O  Na 2 O  2 SiO 2  K 2 SiO 3  Na 2 SiO 3 The first two reactions create 4 molar equivalents of nitrogen gas and the third converts the remaining reactants to relatively inert potassium silicate and sodium silicate . The reason that KNO 3 is used rather than something like NaNO 3 is because it is less hygroscopic. The materials used in this reaction must not be hygroscopic because absorbed moisture can desensitize the system and cause the reaction to fail. The particle size of the initial reactants is important to reliable operation.  110  The NaN 3 and KNO 3 must be between 10 and 20 µm  while the SiO 2 must be between 5 and 10 µm. There are ongoing efforts to find alternative compounds so that airbags have less toxic reactants.  111  The reaction of the Sr complex nitrate SrNH 2 NHCONHNH 2 NO 3  2  of carbohydrazide SrCDH with various oxidizing agents resultS in the evolution of N 2 and CO 2 gases. Using KBrO 3 as the oxidizing agent resulted in the most vigorous reaction as well as the lowest initial temperature of the reaction. The N 2 and CO 2 gases evolved made up 99 of all gases evolved.  112  Nearly all the starting materials will not decompose until reaching temperatures of 500 C or higher so this could be a viable option as an airbag gas generator. In a patent containing another plausible alternative to NaN 3 driven airbags the gasgenerating materials involved the use of guanidine nitrate  5aminotetrazole  bitetrazole dihydrate nitroimidazole  and basic copper nitrate . It was found that these nonazide reagents allowed for a less toxic lower combustion temperature reaction and more easily disposable airbag inflation system.  113  Front airbags normally do not protect the occupants during side rear or rollover collisions.  114  Since airbags deploy only once and deflate quickly after the initial impact they will not be beneficial during a subsequent collision. Safety belts help reduce the risk of injury in many types of crashes. They help to properly position occupants to maximize the airbags benefits and they help restrain occupants during the initial and any following collisions. In vehicles equipped with a rollover sensing system accelerometers and gyroscopes are used to sense the onset of a rollover event. If a rollover event is determined to be imminent sidecurtain airbags are deployed to help protect the occupant from contact with the side of the vehicle interior and also to help prevent occupant ejection as the vehicle rolls over. Triggering conditions  edit  Some cars provide the option to turn off the passenger airbag Airbags are designed to deploy in frontal and nearfrontal collisions more severe than a threshold defined by the regulations governing vehicle construction in whatever particular market the vehicle is intended for United States regulations require deployment in crashes at least equivalent in deceleration to a 23 kmh 14 mph barrier collision or similarly striking a parked car of similar size across the full front of each vehicle at about twice the speed.  115  International regulations are performancebased rather than technologybased so airbag deployment threshold is a function of overall vehicle design. Unlike crash tests into barriers realworld crashes typically occur at angles other than directly into the front of the vehicle and the crash forces usually are not evenly distributed across the front of the vehicle. Consequently the relative speed between a striking and struck vehicle required to deploy the airbag in a realworld crash can be much higher than an equivalent barrier crash. Because airbag sensors measure deceleration the vehicle speed is not a good indicator of whether an airbag should be deployed. Airbags can deploy due to the vehicles undercarriage striking a low object protruding above the roadway due to the resulting deceleration. The airbag sensor is a MEMS accelerometer  which is a small integrated circuit with integrated micromechanical elements. The microscopic mechanical element moves in response to rapid deceleration and this motion causes a change in capacitance which is detected by the electronics on the chip that then sends a signal to fire the airbag. The most common MEMS accelerometer in use is the ADXL50 by Analog Devices  but there are other MEMS manufacturers as well. Initial attempts using mercury switches did not work well. Before MEMS the primary system used to deploy airbags was called a  rolamite . A rolamite is a mechanical device consisting of a roller suspended within a tensioned band. As a result of the particular geometry and material properties used the roller is free to translate with little friction or hysteresis . This device was developed at Sandia National Laboratories . Rolamite and similar macromechanical devices were used in airbags until the mid1990s after which they were universally replaced with MEMS. Nearly all airbags are designed to automatically deploy in the event of a vehicle fire when temperatures reach 150200 C 302392 F.  116  This safety feature often termed autoignition helps to ensure that such temperatures do not cause an explosion of the entire airbag module. Today  when   airbag triggering algorithms are much more complex being able to adapt the deployment speed to the crash conditions and prevent unnecessary deployments. The algorithms are considered valuable intellectual property . Experimental algorithms may take into account such factors as the weight of the occupant the seat location and seat belt use as well as even attempt to determine if a baby seat is present. Inflation  edit  This  section relies largely or entirely on a single source . Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources . Find sources Airbag  news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR  May 2016  When the frontal airbags are to deploy a signal is sent to the inflator unit within the airbag control unit. An igniter starts a rapid chemical reaction generating primarily nitrogen gas N 2  to fill the airbag making it deploy through the module cover. Some airbag technologies use compressed nitrogen or argon gas with a pyrotechnic operated valve hybrid gas generator while other technologies use various energetic propellants . Although propellants containing the highly toxic sodium azide NaN 3  were common in early inflator designs little to no toxic sodium azide has been found on used airbags. The azidecontaining pyrotechnic gas generators contain a substantial amount of the propellant. The driverside airbag would contain a canister containing about 50 grams of sodium azide. The passenger side container holds about 200 grams of sodium azide.  117   better source needed   better source needed  The alternative propellants may incorporate for example a combination of nitroguanidine  phasestabilized ammonium nitrate NH 4 NO 3  or another nonmetallic oxidizer and a nitrogenrich fuel different from azide e.g. tetrazoles  triazoles  and their salts. The burn rate modifiers in the mixture may be an alkaline metal nitrate NO 3  or nitrite NO 2  dicyanamide or its salts sodium borohydride NaBH 4  etc. The coolants and slag formers may be e.g. clay  silica  alumina  glass etc.  118   better source needed   nonprimary source needed   original research  Other alternatives are e.g. nitrocellulose based propellants which have high gas yield but bad storage stability and their oxygen balance requires secondary oxidation of the reaction products to avoid buildup of carbon monoxide or highoxygen nitrogenfree organic compounds with inorganic oxidizers e.g. di or tri carboxylic acids with chlorates ClO 3  or perchlorates ClO 4  and eventually metallic oxides the nitrogenfree formulation avoids formation of toxic nitrogen oxides . From the onset of the crash the entire deployment and inflation process is about 0.04 seconds. Because vehicles change speed so quickly in a crash airbags must inflate rapidly to reduce the risk of the occupant hitting the vehicles interior. Variableforce deployment  edit  Advanced airbag technologies are being developed to tailor airbag deployment to the severity of the crash the size and posture of the vehicle occupant belt usage and how close that person is to the actual airbag. Many of these systems use multistage inflators that deploy less forcefully in stages in moderate crashes than in very severe crashes. Occupant sensing devices let the airbag control unit know if someone is occupying a seat adjacent to an airbag the massweight of the person whether a seat belt or child restraint is being used and whether the person is forward in the seat and close to the airbag. Based on this information and crash severity information the airbag is deployed at either a high force level a less forceful level or not at all. Adaptive airbag systems may utilize multistage airbags to adjust the pressure within the airbag. The greater the pressure within the airbag the more force the airbag will exert on the occupants as they come in contact with it. These adjustments allow the system to deploy the airbag with a moderate force for most collisions reserving the maximum force airbag only for the severest of collisions. Additional sensors to determine the location weight or relative size of the occupants may also be used. Information regarding the occupants and the severity of the crash are used by the airbag control unit to determine whether airbags should be suppressed or deployed and if so at various output levels. Postdeployment view of a SEAT Ibiza airbag Postdeployment  edit  A chemical reaction produces a burst of nitrogen to inflate the bag. Once an airbag deploys deflation begins immediately as the gas escapes through vents in the fabric or as it is sometimes called the cushion and cools. Deployment is frequently accompanied by the release of dustlike particles and gases in the vehicles interior called effluent. Most of this dust consists of cornstarch  french chalk  or talcum powder  which are used to lubricate the airbag during deployment. Newer designs produce effluent primarily consisting of harmless talcum powdercornstarch and nitrogen gas. In older designs using an azidebased propellant usually NaN 3  varying amounts of sodium hydroxide nearly always are initially present. In small amounts this chemical can cause minor irritation to the eyes andor open wounds however with exposure to air it quickly turns into sodium bicarbonate baking soda. However this transformation is not 100 complete and invariably leaves residual amounts of hydroxide ions from NaOH. Depending on the type of airbag system potassium chloride may also be present. For most people the only effect the dust may produce is some minor irritation of the throat and eyes. Generally minor irritations only occur when the occupant remains in the vehicle for many minutes with the windows closed and no ventilation. However some people with asthma may develop a potentially lethal asthmatic attack from inhaling the dust. Because of the airbag exit flap design of the steering wheel boss and dashboard panel these items are not designed to be recoverable if an airbag deploys meaning that they have to be replaced if the vehicle has not been written off in a collision. Moreover the dustlike particles and gases can cause irreparable cosmetic damage to the dashboard and upholstery meaning that minor collisions that result in the deployment of airbags can be costly even if there are no injuries and there is only minor damage to the vehicle structure. Regulatory specifications  edit  United States  edit  On 11 July 1984 the United States government amended Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 208 FMVSS 208 to require cars produced after 1 April 1989 to be equipped with a passive restraint for the driver. An airbag or an automatic seat belt would meet the requirements of the standard. Airbag introduction was stimulated by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration .  119  However airbags were not mandatory on light trucks until 1997.  120  In 1998 FMVSS 208 was amended to require dual front airbags and reducedpower secondgeneration airbags were also mandated. This was due to the injuries caused by firstgeneration airbags though FMVSS 208 continues to require that bags be engineered and calibrated to be able to save the life of an unbelted 50thpercentile size and weight male crash test dummy . The technical performance and validation requirements for the inflator assembly used in airbag modules are specified in SAE USCAR 242.  121  Europe  edit  Some countries outside North America adhere to internationalized European ECE vehicle and equipment regulations rather than the United States Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards. ECE airbags are generally smaller and inflate less forcefully than United States airbags because the ECE specifications are based on belted crash test dummies. The Euro NCAP vehicle safety rating encourages manufacturers to take a comprehensive approach to occupant safety a good rating can only be achieved by combining airbags with other safety features.  122  Almost every new car sold in Europe is equipped with front and side airbags but in the European Union in 2020  123  and in the United Kingdom  and most other developed countries there is no direct legal requirement for new cars to feature airbags. Central and South America  edit  Ecuador requires dual front airbags in new car models since 2013.  124  Since January 2014 except for micro vehicles all new cars made or imported in Argentina must have front airbags.  125  Since 1 January 2014 all new cars sold in Brazil must have dual front airbags.  126  Since July 2014 all new cars sold in Uruguay must have dual front airbags.  127  Since December 2016 all new cars sold in Chile must have dual front airbags.  128  Since 1 January 2017 all cars made or imported in Colombia must have dual front airbags.  129  Since 1 January 2020 all new cars sold in Mexico must have dual front airbags.  130  India  edit  On 5 March 2021 the Indian Ministry of Road Transport and Highways mandated that all new vehicle models introduced in India after 1 April 2021 have dual front airbags the regulation also requires that all existing models be equipped with dual front airbags by 31 August 2021.  131  India also mandated that all passenger vehicles sold after October 2023 must have a minimum of six airbags.  132  Maintenance  edit  The examples and perspective in this section may not represent a worldwide view of the subject . You may improve this section  discuss the issue on the talk page  or create a new section as appropriate.  September 2008   Learn how and when to remove this message  Inadvertent airbag deployment while the vehicle is being serviced can result in severe injury and an improperly installed or defective airbag unit may not operate or perform as intended. Those servicing a vehicle as well as first responders must exercise extreme awareness as many airbag control systems may remain powered for roughly 30 minutes after disconnecting the vehicles battery.  109   3 Some countries impose restrictions on the sale transport handling and service of airbags and system components. In Germany  airbags are regulated as harmful explosives only mechanics with special training are allowed to service airbag systems. Some automakers such as MercedesBenz  call for the replacement of undeployed airbags after a certain time to ensure their reliability in a collision. One example is the 1992 S500 which has an expiry date sticker attached to the door pillar. Some Škoda vehicles indicate an expiry date of 14 years from the date of manufacture. In this case replacement would be uneconomic as the car would have negligible value at 14 years old far less than the cost of fitting new airbags. Volvo has stated that airbags do not require replacement during the lifetime of the vehicle though this cannot be taken as a guarantee on the device.  133  Limitations  edit  Crash test of an underride guard at 3040 kmh 1925 mphthe truck platform at head height has been prevented from impacting the windshield . Although the millions of installed airbags in use have an excellent safety record some limitations on their ability to protect car occupants exist. The original implementation of front airbags did little to protect against side collisions  which can be more dangerous than frontal collisions because the protective crumple zone in front of the passenger compartment is completely bypassed. Side airbags and protective airbag curtains are increasingly being required in modern vehicles to protect against this very common category of collisions. Airbags are designed to deploy once only so are ineffective if any further collisions occur after an initial impact. Multiple impacts may occur during rollovers or other incidents involving multiple collisions such as many multivehicle collisions .  134  An extremely dangerous situation occurs during  underride collisions  in which a passenger vehicle collides with the rear of a tractortrailer lacking a rear underride guard or hits the side of such a trailer not equipped with a side underride guard.  135  The platform bed of a typical trailer is roughly at the head height of a seated adult occupant of a typical passenger car. This means not much of a barrier exists between a head and the edge of the trailer platform except a glass windshield .  136  In an underride collision the cars crush zones designed to absorb collision energy are completely bypassed and the airbags may not deploy in time because the car does not decelerate appreciably until the windshield and roof pillars have already impacted the trailer bed.  134  Even delayed inflation of airbags may be useless because of major intrusion into the passenger space leaving occupants at high risk of major head trauma or decapitation in even lowspeed collisions. Western European standards for underride guards have been stricter than North American standards which typically have allowed grandfathering of older equipment that may still be on the road for decades.  135   137  Typical airbag systems are completely disabled by turning off the ignition key . Unexpected turnoffs usually also disable the engine power steering  and power brakes  and can be the direct cause of a collision. If a violent collision occurs the disabled airbags will not deploy to protect vehicle occupants. In 2014 General Motors admitted to concealing information about fatal collisions caused by defective ignition switches that would abruptly shut down a car including its airbags. Between 13 and 74 deaths have been directly attributed to this defect depending on how the fatalities are classified.  138  Injuries and fatalities  edit  Lives saved by seat belts and airbags in the United States of America over 10 years Under some rare conditions airbags can injure and in some very rare instances kill vehicle occupants. To provide crash protection for occupants not wearing seat belts United States airbag designs trigger much more forcefully than airbags designed to the international ECE standards used in most other countries. Recent smart airbag controllers can recognize if a seat belt is used and alter the airbag cushion deployment parameters accordingly.  139  In 1990 the first automotive fatality attributed to an airbag was reported.  140  TRW produced the first gasinflated airbag in 1994 with sensors and low inflationforce bags becoming common soon afterward. Dualdepth also known as dualstage airbags appeared on passenger cars in 1998. By 2005 deaths related to airbags had declined with no adult deaths and two child deaths attributed to airbags that year. However injuries remain fairly common in collisions with airbag deployment. Serious injuries are less common but severe or fatal injuries can occur to vehicle occupants very near an airbag or in direct contact when it deploys. Such injuries may be sustained by unconscious drivers slumped over the steering wheel unrestrained or improperly restrained occupants who slide forward in the seat during precrash braking and properly belted drivers sitting very close to the steering wheel. A good reason for the driver not to cross hands over the steering wheel a rule taught to most learner drivers but quickly forgotten by most is that an airbag deployment while negotiating a turn may result in the drivers hands being driven forcefully into his or her face exacerbating any injuries from the airbag alone. Improvements in sensing and gasgenerator technology have allowed the development of thirdgeneration airbag systems that can adjust their deployment parameters to the size weight position and restraint status of the occupant. These improvements have demonstrated a reduced injury risk factor for small adults and children who had an increased risk of injury with firstgeneration airbag systems.  141  One model of airbags made by the Takata Corporation used ammonium nitrate based gasgenerating compositions in airbag inflators instead of the more stable but more expensive compound tetrazole . The ammonium nitratebased inflators have a flaw where old inflators with longterm exposure to hot and humid climate conditions could rupture during deployment projecting metal shards through the airbag and into the driver.  142  As of December 2022 the defect has caused 33 deaths worldwide with up to 24 in the U.S. and the remaining in Australia and Malaysia.  143  The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration NHTSA recalled over 33 million vehicles in May 2015  144  and fined Takata 70 million in November 2015.  145  Toyota Mazda and Honda have said that they will not use ammoniumnitrate inflators.  146   147  In June 2017 Takata filed for bankruptcy.  148  Airbag fatality statistics  edit  From 1990 to 2000 the United States NHTSA identified 175 fatalities caused by airbags. Most of these 104 have been children. About 3.3 million airbag deployments have occurred during that interval and the agency estimates more than 6377 lives were saved and countless injuries were prevented.  140   149  A rearfacing infant restraint put in the front seat of a vehicle places an infants head close to the airbag which can cause severe head injuries or death if the airbag deploys. Some modern cars include a switch to disable the frontpassenger airbag in case a childsupporting seat is used there although not in Australia where rearfacing child seats are prohibited in the front where an airbag is fitted. In vehicles with side airbags it is dangerous for occupants to lean against the windows doors and pillars or to place objects between themselves and the side of the vehicle. Articles hung from a vehicles clothes hanger hooks can be hazardous if the vehicles sidecurtain airbags are deployed.  150  A seatmounted airbag may also cause internal injury if the occupant leans against the door.  151   152  Aerospace and military applications  edit  The aerospace industry and the United States government have applied airbag technologies for many years. NASA and United States Department of Defense have incorporated airbag systems in various aircraft and spacecraft applications as early as the 1960s. Spacecraft airbag landing systems  edit  NASA engineers test the Mars Pathfinder airbag landing system on simulated Martian terrain The first use of airbags for landing were Luna 9 and Luna 13 . As with later missions these would use the airbags to bounce along the surface absorbing landing energy. The Mars Pathfinder lander employed an innovative airbag landing system supplemented with aerobraking  parachute  and solid rocket landing thrusters. This prototype successfully tested the concept and the two Mars Exploration Rover Mission landers employed similar landing systems. The Beagle 2 Mars lander also tried to use airbags for landing the landing was successful and the lander touched down safely but several of the spacecrafts solar panels failed to deploy thereby disabling the spacecraft. The Boeing Starliner uses six airbags to cushion the ground landing of the crewed capsule.  153  Aircraft airbag landing systems  edit  Airbags have also been used on military fixedwing aircraft such as the escape crew capsule of the F111 Aardvark . Occupant protection  edit  OH58D CABS test The United States Army has incorporated airbags in its UH60AL  154   155  Black Hawk and OH58D Kiowa Warrior  156  helicopter fleets. The Cockpit Air Bag System CABS  157  consists of forward and lateral airbags and an inflatable tubular structure on the OH58D only with an Electronic Crash Sensor Unit ECSU. The CABS system was developed by the United States Army Aviation Applied Technology Directorate  through a contract with Simula Safety Systems now BAE Systems .  158  It is the first conventional airbag system for occupant injury prevention worldwide designed and developed and placed in service for an aircraft and the first specifically for helicopter applications.  159   160  Other uses  edit  In the mid1970s the UK Transport Research Laboratory tested several types of motorcycle airbags . In 2006 Honda introduced the first production motorcycle airbag safety system on its Gold Wing motorcycle. Honda claims that sensors in the front forks can detect a severe frontal collision and decide when to deploy the airbag absorbing some of the forward energy of the rider and reducing the velocity at which the rider may be thrown from the motorcycle.  161  More commonly air bag vests  either integrated into the motorcyclists jacket or worn over it  have started to become used by regular riders on the street.  162  MotoGP has made it compulsory since 2018 for riders to wear suits with integrated airbags.  163  Similarly companies such as Helite and HitAir have commercialized equestrian airbags which attach to the saddle and are worn by the rider. Other sports particularly skiing and snowboarding have started introducing airbag safety mechanisms.  164  Airbag for cycling Airbag on a motorcycle See also  edit  Airbag dermatitis Airplane airbags List of auto parts Precrash system Safety standards References  edit   Airbags . Insurance Institute for Highway Safety IIHS . Retrieved 7 March 2024 .  The Global Automotive Airbag Market Outlook . Valient Automotive Market Research. Archived from the original on 23 June 2015 . Retrieved 7 March 2024 .  Bellis Mary 9 August 2019. Who Invented Airbags . ThoughtCo . Retrieved 15 January 2020 .  Varela Kristin 19 June 2013. How Many Airbags Are Enough . cars.com . Archived from the original on 15 November 2017 . Retrieved 14 November 2017 .  Warner Kenneth E. 1983. Bags Buckles and Belts The Debate over Mandatory Passive Restraints in Automobiles. Journal of Health Politics Policy and Law . 8 1 44 75. doi  10.1215036168788144 . PMID 6863874 .  U.S. air bag history . motorvista.com . 2000. Archived from the original on 22 February 2001 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  U.S. patent 6272412  Passive restraint control system for vehicles . patentstorm.us . Archived from the original on 12 June 2011 . Retrieved 17 October 2010 .  Circular Letter No. 10 1991 Auto Insurance Premium Discounts For Passive Restraints . New York State Department of Financial Services. 12 April 1991. Archived from the original on 16 March 2014 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  Rotorcraft Active Crash Protection Systems Archived 23 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine  US 2649311  Hetrick John W.  Safety cushion assembly for automotive vehicles published 18 August 1953  University of Birmingham to unveil new blue plaque celebrating the work of two innovative dentists . Birmingham Dental Hospital. 13 March 2019 . Retrieved 18 March 2019 .  US 1331359  Parrott Arthur Hughes  Round Harold published 17 February 1920  assigned to Robert Henry Davis  Meier Urs 2012. 1 Non Finito challenges in rehabilitation . In Fardis Michael N. ed.. Innovative Materials and Techniques in Concrete Construction ACES Workshop . Springer. p. 12. ISBN 9789400719965 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  Khan Moin.S 10 September 2012. Air Bags for Automobiles . Textile Learner . Archived from the original on 18 November 2012 . Retrieved 22 September 2016 .  Mastinu Giampiero Ploechl Manfred eds. 2014. Road and OffRoad Vehicle System Dynamics Handbook . CRC Press. p. 1613. ISBN 9780849333224 . Retrieved 22 September 2016 .  United States Patent 2649311 . United States Patent and Trademark Office . Retrieved 15 March 2021 .  Patent Images . pdfpiw.uspto.gov . Retrieved 15 March 2021 .  Bellis Mary 19 April 2017. The History of Airbags . The Thought Company . Archived from the original on 14 July 2017 . Retrieved 22 September 2016 .  a b Hutchinson Alex 2009. Big Ideas 100 Modern Inventions That Have Transformed Our World . Sterling Publishing. p. 136. ISBN 9781588167224 . Retrieved 22 September 2016 .  Airbag History  When Was The Airbag Invented . airbagsolutions.com . Archived from the original on 16 March 2014 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  The History of Airbags . inventors.about.com . Archived from the original on 22 July 2012 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  Weil Roman L.  Frank Peter B. Kreb Kevin D. eds. 2009. Litigation services handbook the role of the financial expert . John Wiley. p. 22.6. ISBN 9780470286609 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  Achievements of Yasuzaburou Kobori in Japanese. Japan Automotive Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on 2 August 2013 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 . Source of creative ideas he started the development of the air bag as a starting point to develop a safety net of motor vehicles in 1964.  エアバッグ生みの親は日本人だった 週刊SPA . Archived from the original on 19 May 2015.  エアバッグ  airbag.jpg  日刊SPA . 日刊SPA . 21 March 2015. Archived from the original on 23 March 2015 . Retrieved 13 October 2017 .  Ravop Nick 14 January 2000. Allen K. Breed 72 a Developer of Air Bag Technology for Cars . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 28 March 2015 .  Pillow protects you in auto crashes . Popular Science . Vol. 192 no. 5. May 1968. p. 94 . Retrieved 7 March 2024  via Google Books.  Inventor of the Week Archive . web.mit.edu . Archived from the original on 18 March 2009 . Retrieved 27 February 2010 .  a b Fenton John 24 January 1969. Safety Design. The Times .  Phillips David 31 October 2011. Impalas 1973 experimental airbags held up . Automotive News . Retrieved 1 August 2020 .  Lorio Joe 15 June 2009. Whats this 73 Chevrolet Impala doing at a classic car auction . Automobile Magazine . Retrieved 1 August 2020 .  Phillips David 31 October 2011. Impalas 1973 experimental airbags held up Fleet customers tested 1000 vehicles with cuttingedge technology . Automotive News . Retrieved 16 November 2017 .  Tullis Paul 7 June 2013. Air Bag  Who Made That The Magazines 2013 Innovations Issue . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 15 February 2014.  Allstate fleet cars show the reliability of air bags advertisement . Life . Vol. 72 no. 22. 9 June 1972. pp. 8 9 . Retrieved 13 August 2021 .  GMs Acrs . airbagcrash.com . 2001. Archived from the original on 23 February 2014 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  1975 Cadillac Brochure . oldcarbrochures.com . p. 25. Archived from the original on 16 March 2014 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  a b 1974 Oldsmobile Air Cushion Folder . oldcarbrochures.com . pp. 6 7. Archived from the original on 13 December 2014 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  16341699 McCusker J. J. 1997. How Much Is That in Real Money A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States Addenda et Corrigenda PDF . American Antiquarian Society . 17001799 McCusker J. J. 1992. How Much Is That in Real Money A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States PDF . American Antiquarian Society . 1800present Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. Consumer Price Index estimate 1800 . Retrieved 29 February 2024 .  Callas Tony Prine Tom 30 November 2009. Porsche Airbag Systems . Excellence Magazine . US . Retrieved 14 November 2022 .  240 Landmarks of Japanese Automotive Technology  Subaru Legend airbag system . Society of Automotive Engineers of Japan. Archived from the original on 23 November 2014 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  a b Godshall Jeffery. Form Function and Fantasy  seventy years of Chrysler design . Automobile Quarterly . 32 4 70 71. ISBN 9781596139275 . Retrieved 27 April 2019 .  Chrysler Introduces DriverSide Air Bags . Automotive Fleet . July 1988. Archived from the original on 16 March 2014 . Retrieved 27 April 2019 .  Automobile Safety . National Museum of American History . 24 July 2017.  Shaw William H. 2011. Business ethics . WadsworthCengage. p. 220. ISBN 9780495808763 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  1990 Government Mandates Safety . Popular Mechanics . Vol. 173 no. 5. May 1996. p. 59 . Retrieved 5 November 2019 .  1993 Lincoln safety ad  via YouTube.  Lamm Michael July 1993. Jeep Grand Cherokee  another home run for the home team . Popular Mechanics . Vol. 170 no. 7. pp. 25 27 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  Pressler Larry ed. 1996. Air Bag Safety Hearing Before the Committee on Commerce Science  Transportation U.S. Senate . Dianne Publishing. p. 147. ISBN 9780788170676 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  Legislation passed in 1991 required driver and front passenger airbags for passenger vehicles offered for sale in the US after September 1997 and for other vehicles after September 1998. Pressler Larry 2 March 1996. Air Bag Safety Hearing Before the Committee on Commerce Science and Transportations US Senate 104 Congress 2nd session . DIANE. ISBN 9780788170676 .  Chrysler air bag production hits 4 million units . thefreelibrary.com Press release. PRNewswire. 19 April 1993 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  Design and Engineering Awards . Popular Mechanics . Vol. 171 no. 1. January 1994. p. 24 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  Cohn DVera Henderson Nell 31 March 1990. Va. Crash Shines Spotlight on Air Bags Safety Experts Say They Feel Vindicated in 20Year Battle . The Washington Post . p. A.01. Archived from the original on 13 October 2017.  Air Bags Save 2 Lives in Historic Collision . Orlando Sentinel . 1 April 1990. Archived from the original on 18 August 2016.  Dueling Air Bags Allow Two Virginia Drivers to Walk Away from a Horrifying Headon Collision  People  vol. 33 no. 16 23 April 1990 archived from the original on 14 September 2016  a b c Office of Research and Development 21 June 2001. Air Bag Technology in Light Passenger Vehicles PDF . U.S. NHTSA. p. 1. Archived PDF from the original on 15 December 2014 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  Sep 1 1998 Federal legislation makes airbags mandatory . history.com . Archived from the original on 16 March 2014 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  Iglesias Denís 10 October 2017. Latin NCAP los vehículos de Latinoamérica dos décadas por detrás en seguridad Latin NCAP Latin American vehicles two decades behind in safety. El Mundo in Spanish. Spain . Retrieved 24 July 2023 .  Herráez Mario 13 September 2021. Por qué un coche protege mejor en Europa que en Latinoamérica Why does a car protect better in Europe than in Latin America. El Motor in Spanish. Spain . Retrieved 24 July 2023 .  Quinchía Alejandra Zapata 10 April 2023. Por qué los carros que se venden en América Latina no son tan seguros como en Europa Why are the cars sold in Latin America not as safe as in Europe. El Colombiano in Spanish. Colombia . Retrieved 24 July 2023 .  Wilson Robert 3 August 2005. Citroen C4 . The Australian . Archived from the original on 12 May 2006 . Retrieved 3 November 2009 .  Wendler Andrew 23 August 2019. Hondas New Airbag Will Give Front Passengers Better Protection . Car and Driver . US . Retrieved 29 September 2022 .  Ewing Steven 2 September 2020. 2021 MercedesBenz SClass safety tech Rearseat airbags and 48volt architecture . Retrieved 11 February 2023 .  Stoklosa Alexander 22 May 2019. An Airbag for the Back Seat MercedesBenz Is Developing a Clever One . Retrieved 11 February 2023 .  Palmer Zac 29 July 2020. 2021 MercedesBenz SClass gets rearaxle steering and trick new airbag tech . AutoBlog . Retrieved 11 February 2023 .  IIHSHLDI Chevrolet Cobalt 4door . iihs.org . Archived from the original on 23 May 2013 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  IIHSHLDI Dodge Ram 1500 . iihs.org . 16 March 2014. Archived from the original on 10 April 2010.  Johnson Controls develops and manufactures the instrument panel seating system door panels and acoustic parking system for the new MercedesBenz AClass . Archived from the original on 2 March 2017 . Retrieved 11 May 2018 .  Paul Rik 1 January 1996. 1996 MercedesBenz EClass  Roadtest  European Car . Motor Trend . Archived from the original on 4 March 2018 . Retrieved 11 May 2018 .  Dual chamber side airbag apparatus and method . freepatentsonline.com . 20 June 2006 . Retrieved 11 May 2018 .  2008 Honda Accord  Safety Press release. American Honda. 21 August 2007. Archived from the original on 2 March 2017 . Retrieved 11 May 2018 .  All New Volvo S80 Style Sophistication Safety and Scandinavian Press release. Volvo Cars US. 28 February 2006. Archived from the original on 2 March 2017 . Retrieved 1 March 2017 .  Dualchamber Side Airbags . 23 October 2009. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017 . Retrieved 26 January 2017 .  Jakobsson Lotta Lindman Magdalena Svanberg Bo Carlsson Henrik 2010. Real World Data Driven Evolution of Volvo Cars Side Impact Protection Systems and their Effectiveness . Annals of Advances in Automotive Medicine  Annual Scientific Conference . 54  127 136. ISSN 19432461 . PMC 3242537 . PMID 21050597 .  a b c SecondGeneration SipsBag protects both chest and head Press release. Volvo Group Global. 17 July 1998. Archived from the original on 30 June 2015 . Retrieved 15 January 2020 .  Zodiac Coating  Medical Silicone Gel Components . zodiacautomotive.com . Archived from the original on 9 January 2015 . Retrieved 3 September 2018 .  BMW of North America 30 October 1997. BMW Head Protection System Sets New Standard in SideImpact Protection in Latest IIHS Crash Test . theautochannel.com Press release. Archived from the original on 16 March 2014 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  Toyota to Make Side Airbags and Curtain Shield Airbags Standard on All New Passenger Vehicle Models in Japan . theautochannel.com . 23 July 2007. Archived from the original on 16 March 2014 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  Volvo S80 . volvoclub.org.uk . Archived from the original on 2 January 2016 . Retrieved 11 May 2018 .  SideImpact Air Bags SABs . safercar.gov . Archived from the original on 16 March 2014 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  Toyota Develops Worlds First Rearseat Center Airbag . worldcarfans.com . 11 March 2009. Archived from the original on 16 March 2014 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  Bowman Zach 29 September 2011. GM debuts new front center airbag . autoblog.com . Archived from the original on 16 March 2014 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  New ID.3 Today safety wouldnt be possible without simulation  . Volkswagen Newsroom Press release . Retrieved 30 May 2020 .  Fourin FOURIN June 2024. CenterSide External Airbags to Be Introduced for Euro NCAP Requirements . AAA weekly  Asian Automotive Analysis .  Kia Motors Knee Airbag System  Firehouse.com . cms.firehouse.com . Archived from the original on 31 July 2007 . Retrieved 8 December 2009 .  New Air Bag Will Aim For Knees Legs . Los Angeles Times . 24 May 1996. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015.  Technical Development Electronics Parts . toyotaglobal.com . Archived from the original on 24 March 2015.  Airbags . Toyota Europe . Archived from the original on 24 June 2009.  Euro NCAP praises the new DriverSide SRS Knee Airbag manufactured by Toyoda Gosei . Toyoda Gosei Press release. 30 June 2003. Archived from the original on 19 June 2013 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  Toyota Avensis . Euro NCAP. Archived from the original on 24 June 2013 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  Abuelsamid Sam 30 September 2008. Toyota develops rear curtain airbag for tiny iQ . autobloggreen.com . Archived from the original on 14 April 2009 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  Mobility . Archived from the original on 25 February 2016 . Retrieved 1 March 2017 .  Ford Expands Availability of Rear Inflatable Safety Belt to 2014 Fusion . ford.com . Archived from the original on 6 October 2015 . Retrieved 17 September 2015 .  Takata First to Commercialize Front Seat Safety Airbelt for Passenger Cars . us.aving.netnews Press release. 6 December 2010. Archived from the original on 26 April 2014 . Retrieved 11 April 2013 .  2012 Lexus LFA . Car and Driver . 20 October 2009. Archived from the original on 14 September 2015.  Extended protection in the rear The seat belt gets into top shape . daimler.com . 19 November 2012. Archived from the original on 2 January 2016 . Retrieved 17 September 2015 .  Ford Mondeo Introduces Inflatable Seatbelts a Ford First for Australian customers . ford.com . Archived from the original on 2 January 2016.  The Ford inflatable seat belt How it affects car seats and children . consumerreports.org . Archived from the original on 16 September 2015.  AmSafe Inflatable Seatbelts . Cessna . Archived from the original on 14 September 2015.  a b Are Airbags Worth the Money . Flying Magazine . 20 January 2011. Archived from the original on 2 January 2016.  Pedestrian Airbag Technology  a Production System PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 4 October 2016 . Retrieved 4 July 2016 .  LandRoverMENA 1 October 2014. Land Rover Discovery Sport  Pedestrian Airbag . Archived from the original on 2 June 2017  via YouTube.  YouTube . youtube.com . Archived from the original on 2 June 2017.  Dowling Joshua 17 February 2013. Volvo offers worlds first pedestrian airbag . Archived from the original on 2 December 2014 . Retrieved 5 July 2016 .  Volvo V40 . Euro NCAP. August 2013. Archived from the original on 15 October 2013 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  Airbag control unit . Audi . Archived from the original on 5 December 2008.  Media Center . continental.com Press release. Archived from the original on 10 July 2012.  Garcia P. December 2011. A Methodology for the Deployment of Sensor Networks. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering . 11 4.  a b Gabler Hampton C. Gabauer Douglas J. Newell Heidi L. ONeill Michael E. December 2004. Use of Event Data Recorder EDR Technology for Highway Crash Data Analysis PDF Report. Transportation Research Board of the National Academies . Retrieved 22 February 2020 .  a b Montgomery County Fire  Rescue. MCFRS Driver Certification Program Vehicle Safety PDF Report. Montgomery Maryland County Government . Retrieved 22 February 2020 .  US 5089069  Coodly P. Ramaswamy  Francis Souriraja Gas generating composition for air bags published 18 February 1992  Tests on Airbags Analyses of Gases Dusts Structures and Squibs PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 2 February 2014.  Akiyoshi Miyako Nakamura Hidetsugu Hara Yasutake 2000. The Strontium Complex Nitrates of Carbohydrazide as a NonAzide Gas Generator for Safer Drivingthe Thermal Behavior of the Sr Complex with Various Oxidizing Agents . Propellants Explosives Pyrotechnics . 25 5 224 229. doi  10.100215214087200011255224AIDPREP2243.0.CO2O .  US patent 6958101  Ivan V. Mendenhall Robert D. Taylor Substituted basic metal nitrates in gas generation  Air Bags . The Childrens Hospital of Philadelphia. 30 March 2014 . Retrieved 18 July 2022 .  What You Need to Know About Air Bags DOT HS 809 575 . nhtsa.gov . Archived from the original on 28 May 2010 . Retrieved 17 October 2010 .  What You Need to Know About Air Bags DOT HS 809 575 . nhtsa.dot.gov . Archived from the original on 26 November 2009 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  ET 0800 Sodium azide in car airbags poses a growing environmental hazard . sdearthtimes.com . Archived from the original on 17 September 2014 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  Thermally stable nonazide automotive airbag propellants  Patent 6306232 . freepatentsonline.com . Archived from the original on 16 March 2014 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  nonprimary source needed   Bloch Byron 1998. Advanced designs for side impact and rollover protection PDF . NHTSA . Archived from the original PDF on 25 November 2014 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards and Regulations Standard No. 208 . NHTSA . March 1999. Archived from the original on 7 May 2014 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  USCAR2422 Inflator Technical Requirements and Validation . SAE International. 30 April 2013. Archived from the original on 6 January 2014 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  Frontal impact test description Archived 6 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine Euro NCAP website  Cars . 17 October 2016.  Comercio Grupo El 20 January 2014. Nuevo reglamento de calidad para vehículos . El Comercio .  Airbags y ABS sistemas obligatorios en Argentina . La Capital in Spanish . Retrieved 18 July 2022 .  Começa a valer obrigatoriedade de airbag e ABS para carros novos . Auto Esporte . G1. São Paulo. 1 January 2014. Archived from the original on 2 January 2014.  Todo lo que hay que saber de la ley Nº 19.061 . autoblog.com.uy .  Doble Airbag Será obligatorio en Chile . autocosmos.cl . 19 March 2015.  Tiempo Casa Editorial El 7 October 2015. Con bolsas de aire el país se pone a tono con el mundo . El Tiempo .  Martínez Marcos. Mayor protección en los autos la nueva normatividad en la industria . El Economista .  Dual airbags mandatory for new cars from April 1 Business News . businesstoday.in . 5 March 2021 . Retrieved 6 March 2021 .  Sharma Akhilesh 29 September 2022. 6 Airbags In Cars A Must From October 2023 . New Delhi TV . India . Retrieved 2 October 2022 .  Bohr Peter JulyAugust 2010 Air Time AAA World  vol. 12 no. 4 p. 24  a b Curtain air bag Hyundai Sonata Manuals and Car Information . hsguide.net . Archived from the original on 14 July 2014 . Retrieved 7 June 2014 .  a b Getting Started . underridenetwork.org . Archived from the original on 14 July 2014 . Retrieved 7 June 2014 .  Underride Guard on Everything2 Archived 15 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine  Retrieved 29 November 2007  United States Congressional Committee on Commerce 1997. Reauthorization of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration . p. 39.  Feeney Nolan 3 June 2014. GM Disputes Report Tying Ignition Switch Problem to 74 Deaths . Time . Archived from the original on 3 June 2014 . Retrieved 4 June 2014 .  NHTSA 49 CFR Parts 552 571 585 and 595 Docket Notice . NHTSA . 1 December 2000. Archived from the original on 16 March 2014 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  a b Statistical Breakdown of Air Bag Fatalities . National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Archived from the original on 26 February 2008 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  Olson Carin M. Cummings Peter Rivara Frederick P. 2006. Association of First and SecondGeneration Airbags with Front Occupant Death in Car Crashes A Matched Cohort Study. American Journal of Epidemiology . 164 2 161 9. doi  10.1093ajekwj167 . PMID 16775043 .  NHTSA Recalls Spotlight  Takata Air Bag Recalls  November 3 2015 Press Conference . nhtsa.gov . Archived from the original on 2 January 2016.  Krishner Tom 9 December 2022. US reports another Takata air bag death bringing toll to 33 . Associated Press .  Rushe Dominic 19 May 2015. Air bag defect to trigger largest auto recall in US history . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 8 August 2016 . Retrieved 10 December 2016 .  Takata fined 70 million for defective airbags as recalls nearly double . LA Times . Archived from the original on 3 November 2015 . Retrieved 3 November 2015 .  Takatas Woes Are Complete Now Toyota Has Dropped It . Fortune . Archived from the original on 9 November 2015.  Japan air bag maker Takata reports 46 million loss . The Big Story . Archived from the original on 2 January 2016.  Takata brought down by airbag crisis files for bankruptcy . CNN. 25 June 2017.  The statement theyve saved some 26000 lives according to estimates from the ... NHTSA has been published. Bohr Peter JulyAugust 2010 Air Time AAA World  vol. 12 no. 4 p. 24  Toyota Aurion User Manual 2006 model  Australia  Hallman J.J. Brasel K.J. Yoganandan N. Pintar F.A. October 2009. Splenic trauma as an adverse effect of torsoprotecting side airbags biomechanical and case evidence . Ann Adv Automot Med . 53  13 24. PMC 3256804 . PMID 20184829 .  Hallman J.J. Yoganandan N. Pintar F.A. November 2010. Biomechanical and injury response to posterolateral loading from torso side airbags . Stapp Car Crash J . SAE Technical Paper Series. 54  227 57. doi  10.42712010220012 . PMC 3820120 . PMID 21512911 .  NASAs Boeing Crew Flight Test Mission Overview . NASA . Retrieved 1 June 2024 .  Defenselink article . defense.gov . 18 February 1999. Archived from the original on 16 March 2014.  Cockpit Air Bag System CABS for UH60AL . helis.com . 18 November 1999 . Retrieved 15 January 2020 .  OH58D Kiowa Warrior . fas.org . 29 May 2000. Archived from the original on 14 October 2006 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .  Microsoft Word  Sunset Brochure.doc PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 13 September 2005 . Retrieved 17 October 2010 .  Air Defense concept papers . csat.au.af.mil . Archived from the original on 12 August 2010 . Retrieved 17 October 2010 .  BNET News Release on AHS Annual Forum award . findarticles.com . 13 June 2002. Archived from the original on 3 December 2010 . Retrieved 17 October 2010 .  Simula Receives Orders for its Cockpit Air Bag Systems  CABS . allbusiness.com. Archived from the original on 22 May 2010 . Retrieved 15 January 2020 .   06 Wing gets airbag . Motorcycle News . UK. 2 September 2005. Archived from the original on 12 February 2009.  Franklin Emma 8 October 2021. Exploding the myths Everything you need to know about motorbike airbag vests . Motorcycle News . UK . Retrieved 24 July 2023 .  Airbags Compulsory from 2018 . MotoGP . 21 December 2017 . Retrieved 24 July 2023 .  Whitling Cy 27 October 2023. An Introduction to Airbag Packs . www.powder.com . Retrieved 10 December 2024 . External links  edit  Wikimedia Commons has media related to Airbags . Chemistry behind airbags Pictures and details about the 1970s GM Air Cushion Restraint System Magratten Drew 14 September 2014. The Promise of the Air Bag . Retro Report . Retrieved 4 April 2018 . History of airbags and how the technology gave rise to todays smart cars. v t e Car interior Part of a series of articles on cars Instruments Automotive navigation system Automotive night vision Backup camera Blind spot monitor Boost gauge Buzzer Carputer Check engine light Electronic instrument cluster Fuel gauge Headup display Odometer Parking sensor Radar detector Speedometer Tachometer Telematics Telltale Trip computer Controls Bowden cable Brake Clutch Cruise control Electronic throttle control Gear stick Manettino dial Parking brake Power steering Steering wheel Antitheft Alarm Automatic vehicle location Immobiliser Power door locks Remote keyless system Smart key VIN etching Safety Seating Airbag Armrest Bench seat Bucket seat Child safety lock Rearview mirror Rumble seat Seat belt Other elements Boot liner Center console Dashboard Glove compartment Molded carpet Sun visor Vehicle mat Convenience Audio Automobile auxiliary power outlet Cup holder Car phone Category Commons Portal Authority control databases  National Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel