This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources Antikeylogger  news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR  November 2015   Learn how and when to remove this message  An antikeylogger or antikeystroke logger  is a type of software specifically designed for the detection of keystroke logger software often such software will also incorporate the ability to delete or at least immobilize hidden keystroke logger software on a computer. In comparison to most antivirus or antispyware software the primary difference is that an antikeylogger does not make a distinction between a legitimate keystrokelogging program and an illegitimate keystrokelogging program such as malware  all keystrokelogging programs are flagged and optionally removed whether they appear to be legitimate keystrokelogging software or not. The antikeylogger is efficient in managing malicious users. It can detect the keyloggers and terminate them from the system.  1  Use of antikeyloggers  edit  Keyloggers are sometimes part of malware packages downloaded onto computers without the owners knowledge. Detecting the presence of a keylogger on a computer can be difficult. Socalled anti keylogging programs have been developed to thwart keylogging systems and these are often effective when used properly. Antikeyloggers are used both by large organizations as well as individuals in order to scan for and remove or in some cases simply immobilize keystroke logging software on a computer. It is generally advised the software developers that antikeylogging scans be run on a regular basis in order to reduce the amount of time during which a keylogger may record keystrokes.  For example if a system is scanned once every three days there is a maximum of only three days during which a keylogger could be hidden on the system and recording keystrokes. Public computers  edit  Public computers are extremely susceptible to the installation of keystroke logging software and hardware and there are documented instances of this occurring.  2  Public computers are particularly susceptible to keyloggers because any number of people can gain access to the machine and install both a hardware keylogger and a software keylogger either or both of which can be secretly installed in a matter of minutes.  3  Antikeyloggers are often used on a daily basis to ensure that public computers are not infected with keyloggers and are safe for public use. Gaming usage  edit  Keyloggers have been prevalent in the online gaming industry being used to secretly record a gamers access credentials user name and password when logging into an account this information is sent back to the hacker. The hacker can sign on later to the account and change the password to the account thus stealing it. World of Warcraft has been of particular importance to game hackers and has been the target of numerous keylogging viruses. Antikeyloggers are used by many World of Warcraft and other gaming community members in order to try to keep their gaming accounts secure. Financial institutions  edit  Financial institutions have become the target of keyloggers  4  particularly those institutions which do not use advanced security features such as PIN pads or screen keyboards.  5  Antikeyloggers are used to run regular scans of any computer on which banking or client information is accessed protecting passwords banking information and credit card numbers from identity thieves. Personal use  edit  The most common use of an antikeylogger is by individuals wishing to protect their privacy while using their computer uses range from protecting financial information used in online banking any passwords personal communication and virtually any other information which may be typed into a computer. Keyloggers are often installed by people known by the computers owner and many times have been installed by an expartner hoping to spy on their expartners activities particularly chat.  6  Types  edit  Signaturebased  edit  This type of software has a signature base that is strategic information that helps to uniquely identify a keylogger and the list contains as many known keyloggers as possible. Some vendors make some effort or availability of an uptodate listing for download by customers. Each time a System Scan is run this software compares the contents of the hard disk drive item by item against the list looking for any matches. This type of software is a rather widespread one but it has its own drawbacks  The biggest drawback of signaturebased antikeyloggers is that one can only be protected from keyloggers found on the signaturebase list thus staying vulnerable to unknown or unrecognized keyloggers.  A criminal can download one of many famous keyloggers change it just enough and the antikeylogger wont recognize it. Heuristic analysis  edit  This software doesnt use signature bases it uses a checklist of known features attributes and methods that keyloggers are known to use. It analyzes the methods of work of all the modules in a PC thus blocking the activity of any module that is similar to the work of keyloggers. Though this method gives better keylogging protection than signaturebased antikeyloggers it has its own drawbacks. One of them is that this type of software blocks nonkeyloggers also. Several nonharmful software modules either part of the operating system or part of legitimate apps use processes which keyloggers also use which can trigger a false positive . Usually all the non signaturebased keyloggers have the option to allow the user to unblock selected modules but this can cause difficulties for inexperienced users who are unable to discern good modules from bad modules when manually choosing to block or unblock. See also  edit  Keystroke logger Hardware keylogger References  edit   Arora Twinkle Sharma Monika Khatri Sunil Kumar October 2019. Detection of Cyber Crime on Social Media using Random Forest Algorithm . 2019 2nd International Conference on Power Energy Environment and Intelligent Control PEEIC . IEEE. pp. 47 51. doi  10.1109peeic47157.2019.8976474 . ISBN 9781728117935 . S2CID 211058018 .  Keyloggers found plugged into library computers . SC Magazine . Retrieved 25 April 2011 .  Anti Keylogging  Public Computers . Archived from the original on 22 May 2011 . Retrieved 10 May 2011 .  Cyber threat landscape faced by financial and insurance industry . Dr KimKwang Raymond Choo. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017 . Retrieved 21 February 2011 .  Privacy Watch More Criminals Use Keystroke Loggers . PC World About. Archived from the original on 20210301 . Retrieved 20160203 .  Is someone you know spying on you . USA Today . 4 March 2010 . Retrieved 25 April 2011 . v t e Malware topics Infectious malware Comparison of computer viruses Computer virus Computer worm List of computer worms Timeline of computer viruses and worms Concealment Backdoor Clickjacking Maninthebrowser Maninthemiddle Rootkit Trojan horse Zombie computer Malware for profit Adware Botnet Crimeware Fleeceware Form grabbing Fraudulent dialer Infostealer Keystroke logging Malbot Privacyinvasive software Ransomware Rogue security software Scareware Spyware Web threats By operating system Android malware Classic Mac OS viruses iOS malware Linux malware MacOS malware Macro virus Mobile malware Palm OS viruses HyperCard viruses Protection Antikeylogger Antivirus software Browser security Data loss prevention software Defensive computing Firewall Internet security Intrusion detection system Mobile security Network security Countermeasures Computer and network surveillance Honeypot Operation Bot Roast