Loss prevention method This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources Antitheft system  news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR  April 2020   Learn how and when to remove this message  Antitheft systems protect valuables such as vehicles and personal property like wallets phones and jewelry.  1   2   3  They are also used in retail settings to protect merchandise in the form of security tags and labels.  4  Antitheft systems include devices such as locks and keys  RFID tags  and GPS locators . Antitheft  edit  RFID tag concealed beneath the label of a whisky bottle Under normal circumstances theft is prevented simply through the application and social acceptance of property law .  5  Ownership can be marked using technologies such as vehicle license plates  name tags or RFID . When clear owner identification is not possible and when there is a lack of social observance people may be inclined to take possession of items to their own benefit at the expense of the original owner. Motive and opportunity are two enabling factors for theft. Given that motives for theft are varied and complex and are generally speaking not within the control of the victim most methods of theft prevention rely on reducing opportunities for theft. Motives for actively preventing theft  edit  Items may require an antitheft system for a variety of reasons which may occur in combination depending on the type of item and its purpose The item is expensive andor has sentimental value prestigious car family heirloom birthday gift war medals coin collection The item is difficultimpossible to replace if lost produced in low numbers antiques  unique works of art The item is easy to steal retailsupermarket products office stationery The item may be left unattended in an unsafe environment for a certain amount of time laptop in a library car in a carpark Improper use of the item may cause considerable damage or encourage further unauthorized actions theft of car keys stolen building access keys identity theft  The item is desirable to others jewelry mobile phones rare collectibles  auto parts industrial designs The item is otherwise unobtainable Alcohol Tobacco products age related substances Use of theft prevention  edit  Equally varied are the methods developed for theft prevention. Antitheft systems have evolved to counter new theft techniques as they have appeared in society. The choice for a particular antitheft system is dependent on the following factors Financial cost  edit  In addition to the initial obtainable cost of an item the cost of replacement or recovery from theft of the item is usually considered when considering the cost of installing an antitheft system. This cost estimation usually determines the maximum cost of the antitheft system and the need to secure it. Expensive items will generally be secured with a higher cost antitheft system while lowcost items will generally be secured at a lower cost. Insurance companies will often mandate a minimum type of antitheft system as part of the conditions for insurance. Threshold for theft  edit  Antitheft systems are designed to raise the difficulty of theft to an infeasible but not necessarily impossible level. The kind of system implemented often depends on the acceptable threshold for theft. For example keeping money in an inside shirt pocket increases the difficulty of theft above that necessary if the pocket were on a backpack since unauthorized access is made sufficiently more difficult. Methods of theft evolve to decrease the difficulty of theft increased by newer antitheft systems. Because of evolution on both sides and the social aspect of theft the threshold for theft is very dynamic and heavily dependent on the environment. Doors in quiet suburban neighborhoods are often left unlocked as the perceived thresholds for theft are very high. Ease of use  edit  Security is often compromised through the lax application of theftprevention practices and human nature in general. The average antitheft device does not require any additional effort while using the secured item without reducing the level of security. In practice users of security systems may intentionally reduce the effectiveness of an antitheft system to increase its usability see also Password  . For example a home security system will usually be enabled and disabled with an easytoremember code such as 1111 or 1234 instead of a more secure combination. Methods of theft prevention  edit  There are a number of general categories of antitheft systems Sequestering of valuable items  edit  A very common method of preventing theft is the placement of valuables in a safe location. The definition of safe depends on the minimum threshold for theft as determined by the owner. Desk stationery is often considered to be secured if placed in an unlocked drawer away from view while expensive jewelry might be placed in a safe behind a picture in a home. Raising the awareness of theft  edit  Another common method is the alerting of other individuals to the act of theft. This is commonly seen in department stores where security systems at exits alert store employees of the removal of unpaid items.
Older car alarms also fall into this category newer systems also prevent the car from starting or raise an SOS alarm if ever the tracking device is detached from the car or valuable asset.
The revolution of mobile applications and wireless communication make possible to get notified by your phone when your properties are stolen. Probably the first solution of mobile application based theft detection is BluCop which was published in December 2010. Preventing removal of items  edit  A steering wheel lock in a car Valuable items may be attached to a larger immobile object usually furniture or walls. Large vehicles may also be locked in such a way to prevent their being operated. Disabling the stolen item  edit  Items with specific functionality can often be disabled to prevent use of the item should it be stolen. The antitheft system can require disabling on every use or enabling when the item should be secured. Disabling the antitheft system is usually done by requiring identification of the owner at some stage of use. Identification can occur physically or through other methods physical keys numerical codes complex passwords biometric identification. This can work even retrospectively    given that a stolen credit card can easily be invalidated with a phone call to the issuing bank the motivation to steal one is reduced. In the case of vehicle theft the best deterrent to theft is in the installation of an approved vehicle antitheft passive immobilizer . Many vehicles have factoryinstalled antitheft units which provide protection through the ignition system. Under the hood there is a computer that controls the operation of the engine. It is programmed to verify that the RFID tag attached to the key is correct before the engine control module will allow ignition to occur. An approved immobilizer uses a three circuit isolation system which can thwart even an experienced thief. Security tags  edit  See also Electronic article surveillance Antitheft tag on a laptop in a store Security tags are devices that are attached to products to prevent shoplifting and are often used in conjunction with an electronic article surveillance system. SelectaDNA or Smartwater are such security tags  a forensic fluid which contains millions of tiny fragments which have a unique number called SIN SelectaDNA identification number and registered in a national police database together with the owners details is etched into each of those particles. Tracking software  edit  Electronic devices such as laptops cell phones and even gadgets such as iPods  now have software that enable them to  phone home  with information regarding their whereabouts and other information that can assist law enforcement in tracking down the devices. Forensic marking  edit  Assets can be marked with various forensic marking materials for law enforcement tracking of the item. Examples of this type of marking include SelectaDNA and Smartwater . See also  edit  Danish bicycle VINsystem Ketan Kadam  Invention References  edit   Edsall Nicole September 9 2019. The best antitheft devices if your alarm isnt enough . Digital Trends .  Do AntiTheft Bags Work Prevention Is Better Than Nothing . DigiTravelist . 3 January 2020 . Retrieved 20200212 .  Das Debashis Banerjee Sourav Ghosh Uttam Biswas Utpal Bashir Ali Kashif 20210225. A decentralized vehicle antitheft system using Blockchain and smart contracts . PeertoPeer Networking and Applications . 14 5 2775 2788. doi  10.1007s12083021010973 . ISSN 19366442 . S2CID 233962665 .  How do security tags and labels work  Retail Security  SecurityTags.com . Security Tags . 20190131 . Retrieved 20200212 .  Property law . Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 20200212 . v t e Automotive design Part of a series of articles on cars Body Framework Backbone chassis Beltline Bodyonframe Bumper Dagmar Cabrio coach Chassis Continental tire Crumple zone Fender ponton skirts Grille Hood scoop shaker Monocoque Overhang Pillar Platform Quarter panel Roof rack Spoiler Stressed member engine Subframe Tonneau Trunk lid Compartments Hoodbonnet Trunkbootdickie Doors Butterfly Canopy Gullwing Scissor Sliding Suicide Swan Glass Glass run channel Greenhouse Opera window Power window Quarter glass Sunroof Windshieldwindscreen washer fluid wiper Other elements Bumper sticker Curb feeler Frontend bra Hood ornament Instruments Japan black Nerf bar Omniview technology Parts Tiretyre runflat spare Geometry Approach and departure angles Breakover angle Overhang Ride height Roll center Turning radius Weight distribution Exterior equipment Lighting Automotive light bulb types Daytime running lamp Headlamp hidden highintensity discharge sealed beam trafficators Other elements Horn Sideview mirror power Tow hitch Window deflector Legal Registration plate vanity plate Theft Vehicle identification number VIN Category Commons Portal