Conceptual diagrams showing how an asset or target might be attacked This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources Attack tree  news  newspapers  books  scholar  JSTOR  April 2012   Learn how and when to remove this message  Attack trees are conceptual diagrams showing how an asset or target might be attacked.  1  Attack trees have been used in a variety of applications.  In the field of information technology they have been used to describe threats on computer systems and possible attacks to realize those threats. However their use is not restricted to the analysis of conventional information systems.  They are widely used in the fields of defense and aerospace for the analysis of threats against tamper resistant electronics systems e.g. avionics on military aircraft.  2  Attack trees are increasingly being applied to computer control systems especially relating to the electric power grid .  3  Attack trees have also been used to understand threats to physical systems. Some of the earliest descriptions of attack trees are found in papers and articles by Bruce Schneier   4  when he was CTO of Counterpane Internet Security .  Schneier was clearly involved in the development of attack tree concepts and was instrumental in publicizing them.  However the attributions in some of the early publicly available papers on attack trees  5  also suggest the involvement of the National Security Agency in the initial development. Attack trees are very similar if not identical to threat trees . Threat trees were developed by Jonathan Weiss of Bell Laboratories to comply with guidance in MIL STD 1785  6  for ATTs work on Command and Control for federal applications and were first described in his paper in 1982.  7  This work was later discussed in 1994 by Edward Amoroso.  8  Basic  edit  Attack tree for computer viruses.  Here we assume a system such as Windows NT  where not all users have full system access.  All child nodes operate on OR conditions. Attack trees are multileveled diagrams consisting of one root leaves and children.  From the bottom up child nodes are conditions which must be satisfied to make the direct parent node true when the root is satisfied the attack is complete.  Each node may be satisfied only by its direct child nodes . A node may be the child of another node in such a case it becomes logical that multiple steps must be taken to carry out an attack.  For example consider classroom computers which are secured to the desks.  To steal one the securing cable must be cut or the lock unlocked.  The lock may be unlocked by picking or by obtaining the key.  The key may be obtained by threatening a key holder bribing a keyholder or taking it from where it is stored e.g. under a mousemat.  Thus a four level attack tree can be drawn of which one path is  Bribe Keyholder  Obtain Key  Unlock Lock  Steal Computer . An attack described in a node may require one or more of many attacks described in child nodes to be satisfied.  Our above condition shows only OR conditions  however an AND condition can be created for example by assuming an electronic alarm which must be disabled if and only if the cable will be cut.  Rather than making this task a child node of cutting the lock both tasks can simply reach a summing junction.  Thus the path  Disable Alarm  Cut Cable  Steal Computer  is created. Attack trees are related to the established fault tree formalism.  9  Fault tree methodology employs boolean expressions to gate conditions when parent nodes are satisfied by leaf nodes. By including a priori probabilities with each node it is possible to perform calculate probabilities with higher nodes using Bayes Rule . However in reality accurate probability estimates are either unavailable or too expensive to gather. With respect to computer security with active participants i.e. attackers the probability distribution of events are probably not independent nor uniformly distributed hence naive Bayesian analysis is unsuitable. Since the Bayesian analytic techniques used in fault tree analysis cannot legitimately be applied to attack trees analysts instead use other techniques  10   11  to determine which attacks will be preferred by a particular attacker.  These may involve comparing the attackers capabilities time money skill equipment with the resource requirements of the specified attack.  Attacks which are near or beyond the attackers ability to perform are less preferred than attacks that are perceived as cheap and easy. The degree to which an attack satisfies the adversarys objectives also affects the attackers choices.  Attacks that are both within the adversarys capabilities and which satisfy their goals are more likely than those that do not. Examination  edit  Attack trees can become large and complex especially when dealing with specific attacks.  A full attack tree may contain hundreds or thousands of different paths all leading to completion of the attack.  Even so these trees are very useful for determining what threats exist and how to deal with them. Attack trees can lend themselves to defining an information assurance strategy.  It is important to consider however that implementing policy to execute this strategy changes the attack tree.  For example computer viruses may be protected against by refusing the system administrator access to directly modify existing programs and program folders instead requiring a package manager be used.  This adds to the attack tree the possibility of design flaws or exploits in the package manager. One could observe that the most effective way to mitigate a threat on the attack tree is to mitigate it as close to the root as possible. Although this is theoretically sound it is not usually possible to simply mitigate a threat without other implications to the continued operation of the system.  For example the threat of viruses infecting a Windows system may be largely reduced by using a standard nonadministrator account and NTFS instead of FAT file system so that normal users are unable to modify the operating system.  Implementing this negates any way foreseen or unforeseen that a normal user may come to infect the operating system with a virus  citation needed   however it also requires that users switch to an administrative account to carry out administrative tasks thus creating a different set of threats on the tree and more operational overhead.  Also users are still able to infect files to which they have write permissions which may include files and documents. Systems using cooperative agents that dynamically examine and identify vulnerability chains creating attack trees have been built since 2000.  12  Attack tree modeling software  edit  Several commercial packages and open source products are available. Open source  edit  ADTool from University of Luxembourg ATAT Deciduous Ent SeaMonster Commercial  edit  AttackTree from Isograph Secur IT ree from Amenaza Technologies RiskTree from 2T Security RiskyTrees from RiskyTrees See also  edit  Computer insecurity Computer security Computer virus Fault tree analysis IT risk Threat computer Vulnerability computing References  edit   R. Shirey August 2007. Internet Security Glossary Version 2 . Network Working Group. doi  10.17487RFC4949 . RFC 4949 . Informational.  U.S. Department of Defense Defense Acquisition Guidebook Section 8.5.3.3  CheeWooi Ten ChenChing Liu Manimaran Govindarasu Vulnerability Assessment of Cybersecurity for SCADA Systems Using Attack Trees Archived copy PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 20100630 . Retrieved 20120404 .  cite web    CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   Schneier Bruce December 1999. Attack Trees . Dr Dobbs Journal v.24 n.12 . Archived from the original on 6 August 2007 . Retrieved 20070816 .  Chris Salter O. Sami Saydjari Bruce Schneier Jim Wallner Toward a Secure System Engineering Methodology Archived copy PDF . Archived PDF from the original on 20110623 . Retrieved 20120404 .  cite web    CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   MILSTD1785 SYSTEM SECURITY ENGINEERING PROGRAM. everyspec.com . Retrieved 20230905  A System Security Engineering Process 14th National Computer Security Conference Washington DC PDF . Retrieved 20230318 .  Amoroso Edward 1994. Fundamentals of Computer Security . Upper Saddle River Prentice Hall . ISBN 0131089293 .  Fault Tree Handbook with Aerospace Applications PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 20161228 . Retrieved 20190226 .  Donald L Buckshaw Gregory S Parnell Willard L Ulkenholz Donald L Parks James M Wallner O. Sami Saydjari Mission Oriented Design Analysis of Critical Information Systems Military Operations Research V10 N2 2005   permanent dead link    Terrance R Ingoldsby Amenaza Technologies Limited Attack Treebased Threat Risk Analysis A vendor white paper Archived copy PDF . Archived PDF from the original on 20160304 . Retrieved 20120409 .  cite web    CS1 maint archived copy as title  link   NOOSE  Networked ObjectOriented Security Examiner 14th Systems Administration Conference LISA 2000 New Orleans . Retrieved 20100421 .