Software environment vulnerable to attack For the 2020 science fiction novel see Cory Doctorow  Fiction . The attack surface of a software environment is the sum of the different points for  attack vectors  where an unauthorized user the attacker can try to enter data to extract data control a device or critical software in an environment.  1   2  Keeping the attack surface as small as possible is a basic security measure.  3  Elements of an attack surface  edit  This section needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.  October 2021   Learn how and when to remove this message  Worldwide digital change has accelerated the size scope and composition of an organizations attack surface. The size of an attack surface may fluctuate over time adding and subtracting assets and digital systems e.g. websites  hosts  cloud and mobile apps etc.. Attack surface sizes can change rapidly as well. Digital assets eschew the physical requirements of traditional network devices servers data centers and onpremise networks. This leads to attack surfaces changing rapidly based on the organizations needs and the availability of digital services to accomplish it. Attack surface scope also varies from organization to organization. With the rise of digital supply chains interdependencies and globalization an organizations attack surface has a broader scope of concern viz. vectors for cyberattacks. Lastly the composition of an organizations attack surface consists of small entities linked together in digital relationships and connections to the rest of the internet and organizational infrastructure including the scope of thirdparties digital supply chain and even adversarythreat infrastructure. An attack surface composition can range widely between various organizations yet often identify many of the same elements including Autonomous System Numbers ASNs IP Address and IP Blocks Domains and SubDomains direct and thirdparties SSL Certificates and Attribution WHOIS Records Contacts and History Host and Host Pair Services and Relationship Internet Ports and Services NetFlow Web Frameworks PHP Apache Java etc. Web Server Services email database applications Public and Private Cloud Understanding an attack surface  edit  Due to the increase in the countless potential vulnerable points each enterprise has there has been increasing advantage for hackers and attackers as they only need to find one vulnerable point to succeed in their attack.  4  There are three steps towards understanding and visualizing an attack surface Step 1 Visualize. Visualizing the system of an enterprise is the first step by mapping out all the devices paths and networks.  4  Step 2 Find indicators of exposures. The second step is to correspond each indicator of a vulnerability being potentially exposed to the visualized map in the previous step. IOEs include missing security controls in systems and software.  4  Step 3 Find indicators of compromise. This is an indicator that an attack has already succeeded.  4  Surface reduction  edit  One approach to improving information security is to reduce the attack surface of a system or software. The basic strategies of attack surface reduction include the following reduce the amount of code running reduce entry points available to untrusted users and eliminate services requested by relatively few users. By having less code available to unauthorized actors there tend to be fewer failures. By turning off unnecessary functionality there are fewer security risks . Although attack surface reduction helps prevent security failures it does not mitigate the amount of damage an attacker could inflict once a vulnerability is found.  5  See also  edit  Vulnerability computing Computer security Attack Surface Analyzer Vulnerability management Vulnerability scanner References  edit   Attack Surface Analysis Cheat Sheet . Open Web Application Security Project . Retrieved 30 October 2013 .  Manadhata Pratyusa 2008. An Attack Surface Metric PDF . Archived PDF from the original on 20160222 . Retrieved 20131030 .  Manadhata Pratyusa Wing Jeannette M. Measuring a Systems Attack Surface PDF . Archived PDF from the original on 20170306 . Retrieved 20190829 .  cite journal   Cite journal requires journal  help   a b c d Friedman Jon March 2016. Attack your Attack Surface PDF . skyboxsecurity.com . Archived from the original PDF on March 6 2017 . Retrieved March 6 2017 .  Michael Howard. Mitigate Security Risks by Minimizing the Code You Expose to Untrusted Users . Microsoft. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 30 October 2013 .