Function of specifying access rights and privileges to resources Authorized redirects here. For the 2007 Epsom Derby winner see Authorized horse . Authorization code redirects here. For the code allowing internet domain name transfers see AuthCode . Authorization or authorisation see spelling differences  is the function of specifying rightsprivileges for accessing resources which is related to general information security and computer security  and to IAM Identity and Access Management in particular.  1  More formally to authorize is to define an access policy during the configuration of systems and user accounts. For example user accounts for human resources staff are typically configured with authorization for accessing employee records and this policy gets formalized as access control rules in a computer system. Authorization must not be confused with access control. During usage access control enforces the authorization policy by deciding whether access requests to resources from  authenticated  consumers shall be approved granted or disapproved rejected.  2  Resources include individual files or an items data  computer programs  computer devices and functionality provided by computer applications . Examples of consumers are computer users computer software and other hardware on the computer. Overview  edit  IAM consists the following two phases the configuration phase where a user account is created and its corresponding access authorization policy is defined and the usage phase where user authentication takes place followed by access control to ensure that the userconsumer only gets access to resources for which they are authorized. Hence access control in computer systems and networks relies on access authorization specified during configuration. Most modern multiuser operating systems include rolebased access control RBAC where authorization is implicitly defined by the roles. User authentication is the process of verifying the identity of consumers. When an authenticated consumer tries to access a resource the access control process checks that the consumer has been authorized to use that resource. Authorization is the responsibility of an authority  such as a department manager within the application domain but is often delegated to a custodian such as a system administrator. Authorizations are expressed as access policies in some types of policy definition application e.g. in the form of an access control list or a capability  or a policy administration point e.g. XACML . On the basis of the  principle of least privilege  consumers should only be authorized to access whatever they need to do their jobs. Older and single user operating systems often had weak or nonexistent authentication and access control systems. Anonymous consumers or guests are consumers that have not been required to authenticate. They often have limited authorization. On a distributed system it is often desirable to grant access without requiring a unique identity. Familiar examples of access tokens include keys certificates and tickets they grant access without proving identity. Trusted consumers are often authorized for unrestricted access to resources on a system but must be verified so that the access control system can make the access approval decision. Partially trusted and guests will often have restricted authorization in order to protect resources against improper access and usage. The access policy in some operating systems by default grant all consumers full access to all resources. Others do the opposite insisting that the administrator explicitly authorizes a consumer to use each resource. Even when access is controlled through a combination of authentication and access control lists  the problems of maintaining the authorization data is not trivial and often represents as much administrative burden as managing authentication credentials. It is often necessary to change or remove a users authorization this is done by changing or deleting the corresponding access rules on the system. Using atomic authorization is an alternative to persystem authorization management where a trusted third party securely distributes authorization information. Related interpretations  edit  Public policy  edit  In public policy  authorization is a feature of trusted systems used for security or social control . Banking  edit  In banking  an authorization is a hold placed on a customers account when a purchase is made using a debit card or credit card . Publishing  edit  Further information Official  Adjective  and Unauthorized biography In publishing  sometimes public lectures and other freely available texts are published without the approval of the author . These are called unauthorized texts. An example is the 2002 The Theory of Everything The Origin and Fate of the Universe  which was collected from Stephen Hawking s lectures and published without his permission as per copyright law.  citation needed  See also  edit  Look up authorization in Wiktionary the free dictionary. Access control Authorization hold Authorization OSID Kerberos protocol Multiparty authorization OAuth OpenID Connect OpenID Usability of web authentication systems WebFinger WebID XACML References  edit   Fraser B. 1997 RFC 2196  Site Security Handbook  IETF  Jøsang Audun 2017 A Consistent Definition of Authorization  Proceedings of the 13th International Workshop on Security and Trust Management STM 2017 v t e Information security Related security categories Computer security Automotive security Cybercrime Cybersex trafficking Computer fraud Cybergeddon Cyberterrorism Cyberwarfare Electromagnetic warfare Information warfare Internet security Mobile security Network security Copy protection Digital rights management vectorial version Threats Adware Advanced persistent threat Arbitrary code execution Backdoors Bombs Fork Logic Time Zip Hardware backdoors Code injection Crimeware Crosssite scripting Crosssite leaks DOM clobbering History sniffing Cryptojacking Botnets Data breach Driveby download Browser Helper Objects Viruses Data scraping Denialofservice attack Eavesdropping Email fraud Email spoofing Exploits Fraudulent dialers Hacktivism Infostealer Insecure direct object reference Keystroke loggers Malware Payload Phishing Voice Polymorphic engine Privilege escalation Ransomware Rootkits Scareware Shellcode Spamming Social engineering Spyware Software bugs Trojan horses Hardware Trojans Remote access trojans Vulnerability Web shells Wiper Worms SQL injection Rogue security software Zombie Defenses Application security Secure coding Secure by default Secure by design Misuse case Computer access control Authentication Multifactor authentication Authorization Computer security software Antivirus software Securityfocused operating system Datacentric security Obfuscation software Data masking Encryption Firewall Intrusion detection system Hostbased intrusion detection system HIDS Anomaly detection Information security management Information risk management Security information and event management SIEM Runtime application selfprotection Site isolation Authority control databases  National Germany Czech Republic