Act of proving an assertion Not to be confused with Authenticity or Authorization . ATM user authenticating himself Authentication from Greek  αὐθεντικός authentikos  real genuine from αὐθέντης authentes  author is the act of proving an assertion  such as the identity of a computer system user. In contrast with identification  the act of indicating a person or things identity authentication is the process of verifying that identity.  1   2  It might involve validating personal identity documents  verifying the authenticity of a website with a digital certificate   3  determining the age of an artifact by carbon dating  or ensuring that a product or document is not counterfeit . Methods  edit  Main article Provenance Authentication is relevant to multiple fields. In art  antiques  and anthropology  a common problem is verifying that a given artifact was produced by a certain person or in a certain place or period of history. In computer science  verifying a users identity is often required to allow access to confidential data or systems.  4  Authentication can be considered to be of three types The first type of authentication is accepting proof of identity given by a credible person who has firsthand evidence that the identity is genuine. When authentication is required of art or physical objects this proof could be a friend family member or colleague attesting to the items provenance perhaps by having witnessed the item in its creators possession. With autographed sports memorabilia this could involve someone attesting that they witnessed the object being signed. A vendor selling branded items implies authenticity while they may not have evidence that every step in the supply chain was authenticated. Centralized authoritybased trust relationships back most secure internet communication through known public certificate authorities decentralized peerbased trust also known as a web of trust   5  is used for personal services such as email or files and trust is established by known individuals signing each others cryptographic key for instance. The second type of authentication is comparing the attributes of the object itself to what is known about objects of that origin. For example an art expert might look for similarities in the style of painting check the location and form of a signature or compare the object to an old photograph. An archaeologist  on the other hand might use carbon dating to verify the age of an artifact do a chemical and spectroscopic analysis of the materials used or compare the style of construction or decoration to other artifacts of similar origin. The physics of sound and light and comparison with a known physical environment can be used to examine the authenticity of audio recordings photographs or videos. Documents can be verified as being created on ink or paper readily available at the time of the items implied creation. Attribute comparison may be vulnerable to forgery. In general it relies on the facts that creating a forgery indistinguishable from a genuine artifact requires expert knowledge that mistakes are easily made and that the amount of effort required to do so is considerably greater than the amount of profit that can be gained from the forgery. In art and antiques certificates are of great importance for authenticating an object of interest and value. Certificates can however also be forged and the authentication of these poses a problem. For instance the son of Han van Meegeren  the wellknown artforger forged the work of his father and provided a certificate for its provenance as well. Criminal and civil penalties for fraud  forgery  and counterfeiting can reduce the incentive for falsification depending on the risk of getting caught. Currency and other financial instruments commonly use this second type of authentication method. Bills coins and cheques incorporate hardtoduplicate physical features such as fine printing or engraving distinctive feel watermarks and holographic imagery which are easy for trained receivers to verify. The third type of authentication relies on documentation or other external affirmations. In criminal courts the rules of evidence often require establishing the chain of custody of evidence presented. This can be accomplished through a written evidence log or by testimony from the police detectives and forensics staff that handled it. Some antiques are accompanied by certificates attesting to their authenticity. Signed sports memorabilia is usually accompanied by a certificate of authenticity. These external records have their own problems of forgery and perjury and are also vulnerable to being separated from the artifact and lost. In computer science a user can be given access to secure systems based on user credentials that imply authenticity.  6  A network administrator can give a user a password or provide the user with a key card or other access devices to allow system access. In this case authenticity is implied but not guaranteed. Consumer goods such as pharmaceuticals  7  perfume and clothing can use all forms of authentication to prevent counterfeit goods from taking advantage of a popular brands reputation. As mentioned above having an item for sale in a reputable store implicitly attests to it being genuine the first type of authentication. The second type of authentication might involve comparing the quality and craftsmanship of an item such as an expensive handbag to genuine articles. The third type of authentication could be the presence of a trademark on the item which is a legally protected marking or any other identifying feature which aids consumers in the identification of genuine brandname goods. With software companies have taken great steps to protect from counterfeiters including adding holograms security rings security threads and color shifting ink.  8  Authentication factors  edit  The ways in which someone may be authenticated fall into three categories based on what is known as the factors of authentication something the user knows something the user has and something the user is. Each authentication factor covers a range of elements used to authenticate or verify a persons identity before being granted access approving a transaction request signing a document or other work product granting authority to others and establishing a chain of authority. Security research has determined that for a positive authentication elements from at least two and preferably all three factors should be verified.  9   10  The three factors classes and some of the elements of each factor are Knowledge Something the user knows e.g. a password partial password  passphrase  personal identification number PIN challengeresponse the user must answer a question or pattern security question .  11  Ownership Something the user has e.g. wrist band ID card  security token  implanted device  cell phone with a builtin hardware token  software token  or cell phone holding a software token .  11  Inherence Something the user is or does e.g. fingerprint retinal pattern  DNA sequence there are assorted definitions of what is sufficient signature face voice unique bioelectric signals or other biometric identifiers.  11  Singlefactor authentication  edit  As the weakest level of authentication only a single component from one of the three categories of factors is used to authenticate an individuals identity. The use of only one factor does not offer much protection from misuse or malicious intrusion. This type of authentication is not recommended for financial or personally relevant transactions that warrant a higher level of security.  3  Multifactor authentication  edit  Main article Multifactor authentication Multifactor authentication involves two or more authentication factors something you know something you have or something you are. Twofactor authentication is a special case of multifactor authentication involving exactly two factors.  3  For example using a bank card something the user has along with a PIN something the user knows provides twofactor authentication. Business networks may require users to provide a password knowledge factor and a pseudorandom number from a security token ownership factor. Access to a veryhighsecurity system might require a mantrap screening of height weight facial and fingerprint checks several inherence factor elements plus a PIN and a day code knowledge factor elements  12  but this is still a twofactor authentication. Authentication types  edit  Strong authentication  edit  The United States governments National Information Assurance Glossary defines strong authentication as a layered authentication approach relying on two or more authenticators to establish the identity of an originator or receiver of information.  13  The European Central Bank ECB has defined strong authentication as a procedure based on two or more of the three authentication factors. The factors that are used must be mutually independent and at least one factor must be nonreusable and nonreplicable except in the case of an inherence factor and must also be incapable of being stolen off the Internet. In the European as well as in the USAmerican understanding strong authentication is very similar to multifactor authentication or 2FA but exceeding those with more rigorous requirements.  3   14  The FIDO Alliance has been striving to establish technical specifications for strong authentication.  15  Continuous authentication  edit  Conventional computer systems authenticate users only at the initial login session which can be the cause of a critical security flaw. To resolve this problem systems need continuous user authentication methods that continuously monitor and authenticate users based on some biometric traits. A study used behavioural biometrics based on writing styles as a continuous authentication method.  16   17  Recent research has shown the possibility of using smartphones sensors and accessories to extract some behavioral attributes such as touch dynamics keystroke dynamics and gait recognition .  18  These attributes are known as behavioral biometrics and could be used to verify or identify users implicitly and continuously on smartphones. The authentication systems that have been built based on these behavioral biometric traits are known as active or continuous authentication systems.  19   17  Digital authentication  edit  The term digital authentication also known as electronic authentication or eauthentication refers to a group of processes where the confidence for user identities is established and presented via electronic methods to an information system. The digital authentication process creates technical challenges because of the need to authenticate individuals or entities remotely over a network.
The American National Institute of Standards and Technology NIST has created a generic model for digital authentication that describes the processes that are used to accomplish secure authentication Enrollment  an individual applies to a credential service provider CSP to initiate the enrollment process. After successfully proving the applicants identity the CSP allows the applicant to become a subscriber. Authentication  After becoming a subscriber the user receives an authenticator e.g. a token and credentials such as a user name. He or she is then permitted to perform online transactions within an authenticated session with a relying party where they must provide proof that he or she possesses one or more authenticators. Lifecycle maintenance  the CSP is charged with the task of maintaining the users credential over the course of its lifetime while the subscriber is responsible for maintaining his or her authenticators.  3   20  The authentication of information can pose special problems with electronic communication such as vulnerability to maninthemiddle attacks  whereby a third party taps into the communication stream and poses as each of the two other communicating parties in order to intercept information from each. Extra identity factors can be required to authenticate each partys identity. Product authentication  edit  A security hologram label on an electronics box for authentication Counterfeit products are often offered to consumers as being authentic. Counterfeit consumer goods  such as electronics music apparel and counterfeit medications  have been sold as being legitimate. Efforts to control the supply chain and educate consumers help ensure that authentic products are sold and used. Even security printing on packages labels and nameplates however is subject to counterfeiting.  21  In their anticounterfeiting technology guide  22  the EUIPO Observatory on Infringements of Intellectual Property Rights categorizes the main anticounterfeiting technologies on the market currently into five main categories electronic marking chemical and physical mechanical and technologies for digital media.  23  Products or their packaging can include a variable QR Code . A QR Code alone is easy to verify but offers a weak level of authentication as it offers no protection against counterfeits unless scan data is analyzed at the system level to detect anomalies.  24  To increase the security level the QR Code can be combined with a digital watermark or copy detection pattern that are robust to copy attempts and can be authenticated with a smartphone. A secure key storage device can be used for authentication in consumer electronics network authentication license management supply chain management etc. Generally the device to be authenticated needs some sort of wireless or wired digital connection to either a host system or a network. Nonetheless the component being authenticated need not be electronic in nature as an authentication chip can be mechanically attached and read through a connector to the host e.g. an authenticated ink tank for use with a printer. For products and services that these secure coprocessors can be applied to they can offer a solution that can be much more difficult to counterfeit than most other options while at the same time being more easily verified.  2  Packaging  edit  Packaging and labeling can be engineered to help reduce the risks of counterfeit consumer goods or the theft and resale of products.  25   26  Some package constructions are more difficult to copy and some have pilfer indicating seals. Counterfeit goods unauthorized sales diversion material substitution and tampering can all be reduced with these anticounterfeiting technologies. Packages may include authentication seals and use security printing to help indicate that the package and contents are not counterfeit these too are subject to counterfeiting. Packages also can include antitheft devices such as dyepacks RFID tags or electronic article surveillance  27  tags that can be activated or detected by devices at exit points and require specialized tools to deactivate. Anticounterfeiting technologies that can be used with packaging include Taggant fingerprinting  uniquely coded microscopic materials that are verified from a database Encrypted microparticles  unpredictably placed markings numbers layers and colors not visible to the human eye Holograms  graphics printed on seals patches foils or labels and used at the point of sale for visual verification Microprinting  secondline authentication often used on currencies Serialized barcodes UV printing  marks only visible under UV light Track and trace systems  use codes to link products to the database tracking system Water indicators  become visible when contacted with water DNA tracking  genes embedded onto labels that can be traced Colorshifting ink or film  visible marks that switch colors or texture when tilted Tamper evident seals and tapes  destructible or graphically verifiable at point of sale 2d barcodes  data codes that can be tracked RFID chips NFC chips Information content  edit  Literary forgery can involve imitating the style of a famous author. If an original manuscript  typewritten text or recording is available then the medium itself or its packaging  anything from a box to email headers  can help prove or disprove the authenticity of the document. However text audio and video can be copied into new media possibly leaving only the informational content itself to use in authentication. Various systems have been invented to allow authors to provide a means for readers to reliably authenticate that a given message originated from or was relayed by them. These involve authentication factors like A difficulttoreproduce physical artifact such as a seal  signature  watermark  special stationery  or fingerprint. A shared secret  such as a passphrase in the content of the message. An electronic signature  publickey infrastructure is often used to cryptographically guarantee that a message has been signed by the holder of a particular private key. The opposite problem is the detection of plagiarism  where information from a different author is passed off as a persons own work. A common technique for proving plagiarism is the discovery of another copy of the same or very similar text which has different attribution. In some cases excessively high quality or a style mismatch may raise suspicion of plagiarism. Literacy and literature authentication  edit  In literacy authentication is a readers process of questioning the veracity of an aspect of literature and then verifying those questions via research. The fundamental question for authentication of literature is  Does one believe it Related to that an authentication project is therefore a reading and writing activity in which students document the relevant research process   28  . It builds students critical literacy. The documentation materials for literature go beyond narrative texts and likely include informational texts primary sources and multimedia. The process typically involves both internet and handson library research. When authenticating historical fiction in particular readers consider the extent that the major historical events as well as the culture portrayed e.g. the language clothing food gender roles are believable for the period.  4  History and stateoftheart  edit  NSA KAL55B Tactical Authentication System used by the U.S. military during the Vietnam War  National Cryptologic Museum Historically fingerprints have been used as the most authoritative method of authentication but court cases in the US and elsewhere have raised fundamental doubts about fingerprint reliability.  29  Outside of the legal system as well fingerprints are easily spoofable  with British Telecom s top computer security official noting that few fingerprint readers have not already been tricked by one spoof or another.  30  Hybrid or twotiered authentication methods offer a compelling  according to whom  solution such as private keys encrypted by fingerprint inside of a USB device. In a computer data context cryptographic methods have been developed which are not spoofable if the originators key has not been compromised. That the originator or anyone other than an attacker  knows or doesnt know about a compromise is irrelevant. However it is not known whether these cryptographically based authentication methods are provably secure since unanticipated mathematical developments may make them vulnerable to attack in the future. If that were to occur it may call into question much of the authentication in the past. In particular a digitally signed contract may be questioned when a new attack on the cryptography underlying the signature is discovered.  citation needed  Authorization  edit  A military police officer checks a drivers identification card before allowing her to enter a military base. The process of authorization is distinct from that of authentication. Whereas authentication is the process of verifying that you are who you say you are authorization is the process of verifying that you are permitted to do what you are trying to do. While authorization often happens immediately after authentication e.g. when logging into a computer system this does not mean authorization presupposes authentication an anonymous agent could be authorized to a limited action set.  31  Access control  edit  One familiar use of authentication and authorization is access control . A computer system that is supposed to be used only by those authorized must attempt to detect and exclude the unauthorized. Access to it is therefore usually controlled by insisting on an authentication procedure to establish with some degree of confidence the identity of the user granting privileges established for that identity. See also  edit  Authentication protocol Electronic signature References  edit   AbuNimeh Saeed 2011 ThreeFactor Authentication  in van Tilborg Henk C. A. Jajodia Sushil eds. Encyclopedia of Cryptography and Security  Boston MA Springer Publishing  pp. 1287 1288 doi  10.10079781441959065_793  ISBN 9781441959058  archived from the original on 20240423  a b What is Authentication Definition of Authentication Authentication Meaning . The Economic Times . Retrieved 20201115 .  a b c d e Turner Dawn M. 2 August 2017. Digital Authentication The Basics . Cryptomathic. Archived from the original on 14 August 2016 . Retrieved 9 August 2016 .  a b McTigue E. Thornton E. Wiese P. 2013. Authentication Projects for Historical Fiction Do you believe it . The Reading Teacher . 66 6 495 505. doi  10.1002trtr.1132 . Archived from the original on 7 July 2015.  De Filippi Primavera Mannan Morshed Reijers Wessel 20200801. Blockchain as a confidence machine The problem of trust  challenges of governance . Technology in Society . 62  101284. doi  10.1016j.techsoc.2020.101284 . ISSN 0160791X .  Ranjan Pratik Om Hari 20160506. An Efficient Remote User Password Authentication Scheme based on Rabins Cryptosystem . Wireless Personal Communications . 90 1 217 244. doi  10.1007s1127701633425 . ISSN 09296212 . S2CID 21912076 .  Kingsley Bryce J. Schaffer J. David Chiarot Paul R. 10 June 2024. Electrospray deposition of physical unclonable functions for drug anticounterfeiting . Scientific Reports . 14 1 13256. Bibcode  2024NatSR..1413256K . doi  10.1038s4159802463834x . ISSN 20452322 . PMC 11164866 . PMID 38858516 .  Haleem Abid Javaid Mohd Singh Ravi Pratap Suman Rajiv Rab Shanay 2022. Holography and its applications for industry 4.0 An overview . Internet of Things and CyberPhysical Systems . 2  42 48. doi  10.1016j.iotcps.2022.05.004 . ISSN 26673452 .  Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 2008. Authentication in an Internet Banking Environment PDF . Archived PDF from the original on 20100505 . Retrieved 20091231 .  Lee Robert D Winter 2007. Authentication in Internet Banking A Lesson in Risk Management . Supervisory Insights . Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation  42.  a b c Wang Chen Wang Yan Chen Yingying Liu Hongbo Liu Jian April 2020. User authentication on mobile devices Approaches threats and trends . Computer Networks . 170  107118. doi  10.1016j.comnet.2020.107118 .  Ali Saqib Al Balushi Taiseera Nadir Zia Khadeer Hussain Omar 2018. ICSSCADA System Security for CPS. Cyber Security for Cyber Physical Systems . Studies in Computational Intelligence. Springer Nature . doi  10.10079783319758800 . eISSN 18609503 . ISBN 9783319758794 . ISSN 1860949X .  Committee on National Security Systems. National Information Assurance IA Glossary PDF . National Counterintelligence and Security Center. Archived PDF from the original on 21 November 2016 . Retrieved 9 August 2016 .  European Central Bank. Recommendations for the Security of Internet Payments PDF . European Central Bank. Archived PDF from the original on 6 November 2016 . Retrieved 9 August 2016 .  Seals Tara 5 April 2016. FIDO Alliance Passes 150 PostPassword Certified Products . Infosecurity Magazine . Archived from the original on 26 September 2024.  Brocardo ML Traore I Woungang I Obaidat MS.  Authorship verification using deep belief network systems Archived 20170322 at the Wayback Machine . Int J Commun Syst. 2017. doi  10.1002dac.3259  a b Patel Vishal M. Chellappa Rama Chandra Deepak Barbello Brandon July 2016. Continuous User Authentication on Mobile Devices Recent progress and remaining challenges. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine . 33 4 49 61. Bibcode  2016ISPM...33...49P . doi  10.1109msp.2016.2555335 . ISSN 10535888 . S2CID 14179050 .  De Marsico Maria Fartade Eduard Gabriel Mecca Alessio 2018. Featurebased Analysis of Gait Signals for Biometric Recognition  Automatic Extraction and Selection of Features from Accelerometer Signals. Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Pattern Recognition Applications and Methods . SCITEPRESS  Science and Technology Publications. pp. 630 637. doi  10.52200006719106300637 . ISBN 9789897582769 .  Mahfouz Ahmed Mahmoud Tarek M. Eldin Ahmed Sharaf 2017. A survey on behavioral biometric authentication on smartphones. Journal of Information Security and Applications . 37  28 37. arXiv  1801.09308 . doi  10.1016j.jisa.2017.10.002 . S2CID 21265344 .  Draft NIST Special Publication 800633 Digital Authentication Guideline . National Institute of Standards and Technology USA. Archived from the original on 13 September 2016 . Retrieved 9 August 2016 .  Graham Marty 20070207. Fake Holograms a 3D Crime Wave . Wired . ISSN 10591028 . Retrieved 20200424 .  EUIPO AntiCounterfeiting Technology Guide . European Observatory on Infringements of Intellectual Property Rights . 20210226. Archived from the original on 20210317.  Linsner Bristows LLPMarc 2 March 2021. EUIPO Observatory publishes Anticounterfeiting Technology Guide  Lexology . www.lexology.com . Retrieved 20210318 .  Survey of techniques for the fight against counterfeit goods and Intellectual Property Rights IPR infringement . Baldini Gianmarco. Nai Fovino Igor. Satta Riccardo. Tsois Aris. Checchi Enrico. European Commission. Joint Research Centre. Luxembourg Publications Office. 2015. ISBN 9789279545436 . OCLC 948769705 .  cite book    CS1 maint others  link   Eliasson C Matousek 2007. Noninvasive Authentication of Pharmaceutical Products through Packaging Using Spatially Offset Raman Spectroscopy. Analytical Chemistry . 79 4 1696 1701. doi  10.1021ac062223z . PMID 17297975 .  Li Ling March 2013. Technology designed to combat fakes in the global supply chain. Business Horizons . 56 2 167 177. doi  10.1016j.bushor.2012.11.010 .  How Antishoplifting Devices Work Archived 20060427 at the Wayback Machine  HowStuffWorks.com  Norton D. E. 2004. The effective teaching of language arts . New York PearsonMerrillPrentice Hall.  Moenssens Andre A. Meagher Stephen B. 2014. 13. The Fingerprint Sourcebook PDF . United States CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform. ISBN 9781500674151 . Archived PDF from the original on 22 May 2022 . Retrieved 3 November 2022 .  The Register  UK Dan Goodin 30 March 2008 Get your German Interior Ministers fingerprint here . Compared to other solutions Its basically like leaving the password to your computer everywhere you go without you being able to control it anymore one of the hackers comments. Archived 10 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine  Best Practices for Creating a Secure Guest Account . 31 August 2016. Archived from the original on 20171107 . Retrieved 20171106 . External links  edit  National Institute of Standards and Technology  U.S. Department of Commerce August 2013. Electronic Authentication Guideline  NIST Special Publication 800632 PDF . Archived PDF from the original on 20131003. New NIST Publications Describe Standards for Identity Credentials and Authentication Systems v t e Information security Related security categories Computer security Automotive security Cybercrime Cybersex trafficking Computer fraud Cybergeddon Cyberterrorism Cyberwarfare Electromagnetic warfare Information warfare Internet security Mobile security Network security Copy protection Digital rights management vectorial version Threats Adware Advanced persistent threat Arbitrary code execution Backdoors Bombs Fork Logic Time Zip Hardware backdoors Code injection Crimeware Crosssite scripting Crosssite leaks DOM clobbering History sniffing Cryptojacking Botnets Data breach Driveby download Browser Helper Objects Viruses Data scraping Denialofservice attack Eavesdropping Email fraud Email spoofing Exploits Fraudulent dialers Hacktivism Infostealer Insecure direct object reference Keystroke loggers Malware Payload Phishing Voice Polymorphic engine Privilege escalation Ransomware Rootkits Scareware Shellcode Spamming Social engineering Spyware Software bugs Trojan horses Hardware Trojans Remote access trojans Vulnerability Web shells Wiper Worms SQL injection Rogue security software Zombie Defenses Application security Secure coding Secure by default Secure by design Misuse case Computer access control Authentication Multifactor authentication Authorization Computer security software Antivirus software Securityfocused operating system Datacentric security Obfuscation software Data masking Encryption Firewall Intrusion detection system Hostbased intrusion detection system HIDS Anomaly detection Information security management Information risk management Security information and event management SIEM Runtime application selfprotection Site isolation v t e Authentication Authentication APIs BSD Authentication BSD Auth eAuthentication eAuth Generic Security Services API GSSAPI Java Authentication and Authorization Service JAAS Pluggable Authentication Modules PAM Simple Authentication and Security Layer SASL Security Support Provider Interface SSPI XCert Universal Database API XUDA Authentication protocols ACF2 Authentication and Key Agreement AKA CAVEbased authentication ChallengeHandshake Authentication Protocol CHAP MSCHAP Central Authentication Service CAS CRAMMD5 Diameter Extensible Authentication Protocol EAP Host Identity Protocol HIP IndieAuth Kerberos LAN Manager NT LAN Manager NTLM OAuth OpenID OpenID Connect OIDC Passwordauthenticated key agreement protocols Password Authentication Protocol PAP Protected Extensible Authentication Protocol PEAP Remote Access Dial In User Service RADIUS Resource Access Control Facility RACF Secure Remote Password protocol SRP TACACS WooLam Category Commons Authority control databases  National United States France BnF data Japan Israel