Method of bypassing authentication or encryption in a computer A backdoor is a typically covert method of bypassing normal authentication or encryption in a computer product embedded device e.g. a home router  or its embodiment e.g. part of a cryptosystem  algorithm  chipset  or even a homunculus computera tiny computerwithinacomputer such as that found in Intels AMT technology .  1   2  Backdoors are most often used for securing remote access to a computer or obtaining access to plaintext in cryptosystems. From there it may be used to gain access to privileged information like passwords corrupt or delete data on hard drives or transfer information within autoschediastic networks. In the United States the 1994 Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act forces internet providers to provide backdoors for government authorities.  3   4  In 2024 the U.S. government realized that China had been tapping communications in the U.S. using that infrastructure for months or perhaps longer  5  China recorded presidential candidate campaign office phone calls including employees of the thenvice president of the nation and of the candidates themselves.  6  A backdoor may take the form of a hidden part of a program  7  a separate program e.g. Back Orifice may subvert the system through a rootkit  code in the firmware of the hardware  8  or parts of an operating system such as Windows .  9   10   11  Trojan horses can be used to create vulnerabilities in a device. A Trojan horse may appear to be an entirely legitimate program but when executed it triggers an activity that may install a backdoor.  12  Although some are secretly installed other backdoors are deliberate and widely known. These kinds of backdoors have legitimate uses such as providing the manufacturer with a way to restore user passwords. Many systems that store information within the cloud fail to create accurate security measures. If many systems are connected within the cloud  hackers can gain access to all other platforms through the most vulnerable system.  13  Default passwords or other default credentials can function as backdoors if they are not changed by the user. Some debugging features can also act as backdoors if they are not removed in the release version.  14  In 1993 the United States government attempted to deploy an encryption system the Clipper chip  with an explicit backdoor for law enforcement and national security access. The chip was unsuccessful.  15  Recent proposals to counter backdoors include creating a database of backdoors triggers and then using neural networks to detect them.  16  Overview  edit  The threat of backdoors surfaced when multiuser and networked operating systems became widely adopted. Petersen and Turn discussed computer subversion in a paper published in the proceedings of the 1967 AFIPS Conference.  17  They noted a class of active infiltration attacks that use trapdoor entry points into the system to bypass security facilities and permit direct access to data. The use of the word trapdoor here clearly coincides with more recent definitions of a backdoor. However since the advent of public key cryptography the term trapdoor has acquired a different meaning see trapdoor function  and thus the term backdoor is now preferred only after the term trapdoor went out of use. More generally such security breaches were discussed at length in a RAND Corporation task force report published under DARPA sponsorship by J.P. Anderson and D.J. Edwards in 1970.  18  While initially targeting the computer vision domain backdoor attacks have expanded to encompass various other domains including text audio MLbased computeraided design and MLbased wireless signal classification. Additionally vulnerabilities in backdoors have been demonstrated in deep generative models  reinforcement learning e.g. AI GO and deep graph models. These broadranging potential risks have prompted concerns from national security agencies regarding their potentially disastrous consequences.  19  A backdoor in a login system might take the form of a hard coded user and password combination which gives access to the system. An example of this sort of backdoor was used as a plot device in the 1983 film WarGames  in which the architect of the  WOPR  computer system had inserted a hardcoded passwordless account which gave the user access to the system and to undocumented parts of the system in particular a video gamelike simulation mode and direct interaction with the artificial intelligence . Although the number of backdoors in systems using proprietary software software whose source code is not publicly available is not widely credited they are nevertheless frequently exposed. Programmers have even succeeded in secretly installing large amounts of benign code as Easter eggs in programs although such cases may involve official forbearance if not actual permission. Politics and attribution  edit  This section possibly contains original research . Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.  June 2019   Learn how and when to remove this message  There are a number of cloak and dagger considerations that come into play when apportioning responsibility. Covert backdoors sometimes masquerade as inadvertent defects bugs for reasons of plausible deniability . In some cases these might begin life as an actual bug inadvertent error which once discovered are then deliberately left unfixed and undisclosed whether by a rogue employee for personal advantage or with executive awareness and oversight. It is also possible for an entirely aboveboard corporations technology base to be covertly and untraceably tainted by external agents hackers though this level of sophistication is thought to exist mainly at the level of nation state actors. For example if a photomask obtained from a photomask supplier differs in a few gates from its photomask specification a chip manufacturer would be hardpressed to detect this if otherwise functionally silent a covert rootkit running in the photomask etching equipment could enact this discrepancy unbeknown to the photomask manufacturer either and by such means one backdoor potentially leads to another.  note 1  In general terms the long dependencychains in the modern highly specialized technological economy and innumerable humanelements process controlpoints make it difficult to conclusively pinpoint responsibility at such time as a covert backdoor becomes unveiled. Even direct admissions of responsibility must be scrutinized carefully if the confessing party is beholden to other powerful interests. Examples  edit  Worms  edit  Many computer worms  such as Sobig and Mydoom  install a backdoor on the affected computer generally a PC on broadband running Microsoft Windows and Microsoft Outlook . Such backdoors appear to be installed so that spammers can send junk email from the infected machines. Others such as the SonyBMG rootkit  placed secretly on millions of music CDs through late 2005 are intended as DRM measuresand in that case as datagathering agents  since both surreptitious programs they installed routinely contacted central servers. A sophisticated attempt to plant a backdoor in the Linux kernel  exposed in November 2003 added a small and subtle code change by subverting the revision control system .  20  In this case a twoline change appeared to check root access permissions of a caller to the sys_wait4 function but because it used assignment  instead of equality checking   it actually granted permissions to the system. This difference is easily overlooked and could even be interpreted as an accidental typographical error rather than an intentional attack.  21   22  Marked in yellow backdoor admin password hidden in the code In January 2014 a backdoor was discovered in certain Samsung Android products like the Galaxy devices. The Samsung proprietary Android versions are fitted with a backdoor that provides remote access to the data stored on the device. In particular the Samsung Android software that is in charge of handling the communications with the modem using the Samsung IPC protocol implements a class of requests known as remote file server RFS commands that allows the backdoor operator to perform via modem remote IO operations on the device hard disk or other storage. As the modem is running Samsung proprietary Android software it is likely that it offers overtheair remote control that could then be used to issue the RFS commands and thus to access the file system on the device.  23  Object code backdoors  edit  Harder to detect backdoors involve modifying object code  rather than source codeobject code is much harder to inspect as it is designed to be machinereadable not humanreadable. These backdoors can be inserted either directly in the ondisk object code or inserted at some point during compilation assembly linking or loadingin the latter case the backdoor never appears on disk only in memory. Object code backdoors are difficult to detect by inspection of the object code but are easily detected by simply checking for changes differences notably in length or in checksum and in some cases can be detected or analyzed by disassembling the object code. Further object code backdoors can be removed assuming source code is available by simply recompiling from source on a trusted system. Thus for such backdoors to avoid detection all extant copies of a binary must be subverted and any validation checksums must also be compromised and source must be unavailable to prevent recompilation. Alternatively these other tools length checks diff checksumming disassemblers can themselves be compromised to conceal the backdoor for example detecting that the subverted binary is being checksummed and returning the expected value not the actual value. To conceal these further subversions the tools must also conceal the changes in themselvesfor example a subverted checksummer must also detect if it is checksumming itself or other subverted tools and return false values. This leads to extensive changes in the system and tools being needed to conceal a single change. As object code can be regenerated by recompiling reassembling relinking the original source code making a persistent object code backdoor without modifying source code requires subverting the compiler itselfso that when it detects that it is compiling the program under attack it inserts the backdooror alternatively the assembler linker or loader. As this requires subverting the compiler this in turn can be fixed by recompiling the compiler removing the backdoor insertion code. This defense can in turn be subverted by putting a source metabackdoor in the compiler so that when it detects that it is compiling itself it then inserts this metabackdoor generator together with the original backdoor generator for the original program under attack. After this is done the source metabackdoor can be removed and the compiler recompiled from original source with the compromised compiler executable the backdoor has been bootstrapped. This attack dates to a 1974 paper by Karger and Schell  24  and was popularized in Thompsons 1984 article entitled Reflections on Trusting Trust  25  it is hence colloquially known as the Trusting Trust attack. See compiler backdoors  below for details. Analogous attacks can target lower levels of the system
such as the operating system and can be inserted during the system booting process these are also mentioned by Karger and Schell in 1974 and now exist in the form of boot sector viruses .  24   26  Asymmetric backdoors  edit  A traditional backdoor is a symmetric backdoor anyone that finds the backdoor can in turn use it. The notion of an asymmetric backdoor was introduced by Adam Young and Moti Yung in the Proceedings of Advances in Cryptology  Crypto 96 . An asymmetric backdoor can only be used by the attacker who plants it even if the full implementation of the backdoor becomes public e.g. via publishing being discovered and disclosed by reverse engineering  etc.. Also it is computationally intractable to detect the presence of an asymmetric backdoor under blackbox queries. This class of attacks have been termed kleptography  they can be carried out in software hardware for example smartcards  or a combination of the two. The theory of asymmetric backdoors is part of a larger field now called cryptovirology . Notably NSA inserted a kleptographic backdoor into the Dual EC DRBG standard.  8   27   28  There exists an experimental asymmetric backdoor in RSA key generation. This OpenSSL RSA backdoor designed by Young and Yung utilizes a twisted pair of elliptic curves and has been made available.  29  Compiler backdoors  edit  A sophisticated form of black box backdoor is a compiler backdoor  where not only is a compiler subvertedto insert a backdoor in some other program such as a login programbut it is further modified to detect when it is compiling itself and then inserts both the backdoor insertion code targeting the other program and the codemodifying selfcompilation like the mechanism through which retroviruses infect their host. This can be done by modifying the source code and the resulting compromised compiler object code can compile the original unmodified source code and insert itself the exploit has been bootstrapped. This attack was originally presented in Karger  Schell 1974  note 2  which was a United States Air Force security analysis of Multics  where they described such an attack on a PLI compiler and call it a compiler trap door. They also mention a variant where the system initialization code is modified to insert a backdoor during booting  as this is complex and poorly understood and call it an initialization trapdoor this is now known as a boot sector virus .  26  This attack was then actually implemented by Ken Thompson  and popularized in his Turing Award acceptance speech in 1983 Reflections on Trusting Trust  25  which points out that trust is relative and the only software one can truly trust is code where every step of the bootstrapping has been inspected. This backdoor mechanism is based on the fact that people only review source humanwritten code and not compiled machine code  object code . A program called a compiler is used to create the second from the first and the compiler is usually trusted to do an honest job. Thompsons paper  25  describes a modified version of the Unix C compiler that would put an invisible backdoor in the Unix login command when it noticed that the login program was being compiled and would also add this feature undetectably to future compiler versions upon their compilation as well. As the compiler itself was a compiled program users would be extremely unlikely to notice the machine code instructions that performed these tasks. Because of the second task the compilers source code would appear clean. Whats worse in Thompsons proof of concept implementation the subverted compiler also subverted the analysis program the disassembler  so that anyone who examined the binaries in the usual way would not actually see the real code that was running but something else instead. Karger and Schell gave an updated analysis of the original exploit in 2002 and in 2009 Wheeler wrote a historical overview and survey of the literature.  note 3  In 2023 Cox published an annotated version of Thompsons backdoor source code.  31  Occurrences  edit  Thompsons version was officially never released into the wild. However it is believed that a version was distributed to BBN and at least one use of the backdoor was recorded.  note 4  There are scattered anecdotal reports of such backdoors in subsequent years. In August 2009 an attack of this kind was discovered by Sophos labs. The W32InducA virus infected the program compiler for Delphi  a Windows programming language. The virus introduced its own code to the compilation of new Delphi programs allowing it to infect and propagate to many systems without the knowledge of the software programmer. The virus looks for a Delphi installation modifies the SysConst.pas file which is the source code of a part of the standard library and compiles it. After that every program compiled by that Delphi installation will contain the virus. An attack that propagates by building its own Trojan horse can be especially hard to discover. It resulted in many software vendors releasing infected executables without realizing it sometimes claiming false positives. After all the executable was not tampered with the compiler was. It is believed that the InducA virus had been propagating for at least a year before it was discovered.  note 5  In 2015 a malicious copy of Xcode XcodeGhost  also performed a similar attack and infected iOS apps from a dozen of software companies in China. Globally 4000 apps were found to be affected. It was not a true Thompson Trojan as it does not infect development tools themselves but it did prove that toolchain poisoning can cause substantial damages.  34  Countermeasures  edit  Once a system has been compromised with a backdoor or Trojan horse such as the Trusting Trust compiler it is very hard for the rightful user to regain control of the system  typically one should rebuild a clean system and transfer data but not executables over. However several practical weaknesses in the Trusting Trust scheme have been suggested.  For example a sufficiently motivated user could painstakingly review the machine code of the untrusted compiler before using it. As mentioned above there are ways to hide the Trojan horse such as subverting the disassembler but there are ways to counter that defense too such as writing a disassembler from scratch.  citation needed  A generic method to counter trusting trust attacks is called diverse doublecompiling . The method requires a different compiler and the source code of the compilerundertest. That source compiled with both compilers results in two different stage1 compilers which however should have the same behavior. Thus the same source compiled with both stage1 compilers must then result in two identical stage2 compilers. A formal proof is given that the latter comparison guarantees that the purported source code and executable of the compilerundertest correspond under some assumptions. This method was applied by its author to verify that the C compiler of the GCC suite v. 3.0.4 contained no trojan using icc v. 11.0 as the different compiler.  30  In practice such verifications are not done by end users except in extreme circumstances of intrusion detection and analysis due to the rarity of such sophisticated attacks and because programs are typically distributed in binary form. Removing backdoors including compiler backdoors is typically done by simply rebuilding a clean system. However the sophisticated verifications are of interest to operating system vendors to ensure that they are not distributing a compromised system and in highsecurity settings where such attacks are a realistic concern. List of known backdoors  edit  Back Orifice was created in 1998 by hackers from Cult of the Dead Cow group as a remote administration tool. It allowed Windows computers to be remotely controlled over a network and parodied the name of Microsofts BackOffice . The Dual EC DRBG cryptographically secure pseudorandom number generator was revealed in 2013 to possibly have a kleptographic backdoor deliberately inserted by NSA who also had the private key to the backdoor.  8   28  Several backdoors in the unlicensed copies of WordPress plugins were discovered in March 2014.  35  They were inserted as obfuscated JavaScript code and silently created for example an admin account in the website database. A similar scheme was later exposed in a Joomla plugin.  36  Borland Interbase versions 4.0 through 6.0 had a hardcoded backdoor put there by the developers. The server code contains a compiledin backdoor account username politically  password correct  which could be accessed over a network connection a user logging in with this backdoor account could take full control over all Interbase databases. The backdoor was detected in 2001 and a patch was released.  37   38  Juniper Networks backdoor inserted in the year 2008 into the versions of firmware ScreenOS from 6.2.0r15 to 6.2.0r18 and from 6.3.0r12 to 6.3.0r20  39  that gives any user administrative access when using a special master password.  40  Several backdoors were discovered in CDATA Optical Line Termination OLT devices.  41  Researchers released the findings without notifying CDATA because they believe the backdoors were intentionally placed by the vendor.  42  A backdoor in versions 5.6.0 and 5.6.1 of the popular Linux utility XZ Utils was discovered in March 2024 by software developer Andres Freund.  43  The backdoor gives an attacker who possesses a specific Ed448 private key remote code execution capabilities on the affected Linux systems. The issue has been assigned a CVSS score of 10.0 the highest possible score.  44   45   46  See also  edit  BackdoorWin32.Hupigon Hardware backdoor Titanium malware Notes  edit   This hypothetical scenario is essentially a silicon version of the undetectable compiler backdoors  Specifically Section 3.4.5 Trap Door Insertion  24   52  Karger  Schell 2002 Section 3.2.4 Compiler trap doors  26   52 Wheeler 2009 Section 2 Background and related work  30   Jargon File entry for backdoor describes Thompson compiler hack  32   Sophos labs on the discovery of the InducA virus  33  References  edit   Eckersley Peter Portnoy Erica 8 May 2017. Intels Management Engine is a security hazard and users need a way to disable it . www.eff.org . EFF . Retrieved 15 May 2017 .  Hoffman Chris 22 November 2017. Intel Management Engine Explained The Tiny Computer Inside Your CPU . HowTo Geek . Retrieved July 13 2018 .  The 30yearold internet backdoor law that came back to bite . 7 October 2024.  Michael Kan 7 October 2024. Chinese Hackers Reportedly Breached ISPs Including ATT Verizon . PC Magazine . Retrieved 8 October 2024 . privacy researchers to call out the US government for maintaining a confidential backdoor to enable internetbased wiretapping. Case in point theres no way to build a backdoor that only the good guys can use tweeted Meredith Whittaker president of the encrypted chat app Signal  Sarah Krouse Dustin Volz Aruna Viswanatha Robert McMillan 5 October 2024. U.S. Wiretap Systems Targeted in ChinaLinked Hack . Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 8 October 2024 . For months or longer the hackers might have held access to network infrastructure used to cooperate with lawful U.S. requests for communications data  Dustin Volz 2 November 2024. Chinese Hackers Stole Phone Audio From Both Harris and Trump Campaigns . Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 3 November 2024 . targeted the phones of former President Donald Trump his running mate JD Vance and people affiliated with Vice President Kamala Harriss presidential campaign  Chris Wysopal Chris Eng. Static Detection of Application Backdoors PDF . Veracode . Retrieved 20150314 .  a b c Zetter Kim 20130924. How a Crypto Backdoor Pitted the Tech World Against the NSA . Wired . Retrieved 5 April 2018 .  Ashok India 21 June 2017. Hackers using NSA malware DoublePulsar to infect Windows PCs with Monero mining Trojan . International Business Times UK . Retrieved 1 July 2017 .  Microsoft Back Doors . GNU Operating System . Retrieved 1 July 2017 .  NSA backdoor detected on 55000 Windows boxes can now be remotely removed . Ars Technica. 20170425 . Retrieved 1 July 2017 .  Backdoors and Trojan Horses By the Internet Security Systems XForce. Information Security Technical Report . 6 4 31 57. 20011201. doi  10.1016S1363412701004058 . ISSN 13634127 .  Linthicum David. Caution The clouds backdoor is your datacenter . InfoWorld . Retrieved 20181129 .  Bogus story no Chinese backdoor in military chip . blog.erratasec.com . Retrieved 5 April 2018 .  Clipper a failure . 16 April 2015.  Menisov Artem B. Lomako Aleksandr G. Dudkin Andrey S. 20220822. Метод защиты нейронных сетей от компьютерных бэкдоратак на основе идентификации триггеров закладок A method for protecting neural networks from computer backdoor attacks based on the trigger identification PDF . Journal Scientific and Technical of Information Technologies Mechanics and Optics in Russian. 140 4 742. doi  10.17586222614942022224742750 . ISSN 22261494 . S2CID 251940761 .  Petersen H.E. Turn R. 1967 System Implications of Information Privacy Proceedings of the AFIPS Spring Joint Computer Conference  30  AFIPS Press 291 300  WH Ware ed. February 1970. Security Controls for Computer Systems. Technical Report R609 Report. RAND Corp .  Gao Yansong Doan Bao Gia Zhang Zhi Ma Siqi Zhang Jiliang Fu Anmin Nepal Surya Kim Hyoungshick 20200802. Backdoor Attacks and Countermeasures on Deep Learning A Comprehensive Review. arXiv  2007.10760  cs.CR .  McVoy Larry. Re BK2CVS problem . linuxkernel mailing list . Retrieved 18 September 2020 .  An attempt to backdoor the kernel . lwn.net . 20031106. Archived from the original on 20040216 . Retrieved 20210208 .  Poulsen Kevin 6 November 2003. Thwarted Linux backdoor hints at smarter hacks . SecurityFocus .  SamsungGalaxyBackdoor  Replicant . redmine.replicant.us . Retrieved 5 April 2018 .  a b c Karger Paul A. Schell Roger R. June 1974. Multics Security Evaluation Vulnerability Analysis PDF . Vol. II. Archived from the original PDF on 20110709 . Retrieved 20141109 .  a b c Thompson Ken August 1984. Reflections on Trusting Trust PDF . Communications of the ACM . 27 8 761 763. doi  10.1145358198.358210 . S2CID 34854438 .  a b c Karger Paul A. Schell Roger R. September 18 2002. Thirty years later Lessons from the Multics security evaluation. 18th Annual Computer Security Applications Conference 2002. Proceedings PDF . IEEE. pp. 119 126. doi  10.1109CSAC.2002.1176285 . ISBN 0769518281 . Retrieved 20141108 .  Akkad Omar El 20 January 2014. The strange connection between the NSA and an Ontario tech firm . The Globe and Mail . Retrieved 5 April 2018 .  a b Perlroth Nicole Larson Jeff Shane Scott 5 September 2013. N.S.A. Able to Foil Basic Safeguards of Privacy on Web . The New York Times . Retrieved 5 April 2018 .  Malicious Cryptography Cryptovirology and Kleptography . www.cryptovirology.com . Archived from the original on 21 February 2015 . Retrieved 5 April 2018 .  a b Wheeler David A. 7 December 2009. Fully Countering Trusting Trust through Diverse DoubleCompiling Ph.D.. Fairfax VA George Mason University . Archived from the original on 20141008 . Retrieved 20141109 .  Cox Russ October 25 2023. Running the Reflections on Trusting Trust Compiler .  Jargon File entry for backdoor   via catb.org.  Compileavirus  W32InducA .  Apple scrambles after 40 malicious XcodeGhost apps haunt App Store . 21 September 2015.  Unmasking Free Premium WordPress Plugins . Sucuri Blog . 20140326 . Retrieved 3 March 2015 .  Sinegubko Denis 20140423. Joomla Plugin Constructor Backdoor . Sucuri . Retrieved 13 March 2015 .  Vulnerability Note VU247371 . Vulnerability Note Database . Retrieved 13 March 2015 .  Interbase Server Contains Compiledin Back Door Account . CERT . 31 December 2001 . Retrieved 13 March 2015 .  Researchers confirm backdoor password in Juniper firewall code . Ars Technica . 20151221 . Retrieved 20160116 .  Zagrożenia tygodnia 2015W52  Spece.IT . Spece.IT in Polish. 20151223 . Retrieved 20160116 .  Multiple vulnerabilities found in CDATA OLTs  IT Security Research by Pierre .  Backdoor accounts discovered in 29 FTTH devices from Chinese vendor CData . ZDNet .  Claburn Thomas. Malicious backdoor spotted in Linux compression library xz . The Register . Archived from the original on 1 April 2024 . Retrieved 1 April 2024 .  Gatlan Sergiu. Red Hat warns of backdoor in XZ tools used by most Linux distros . BleepingComputer . Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 .  Akamai Security Intelligence Group 1 April 2024. XZ Utils Backdoor  Everything You Need to Know and What You Can Do . Archived from the original on 2 April 2024 . Retrieved 2 April 2024 .  James Sam. xzutils backdoor situation CVE20243094 . GitHub . Archived from the original on 2 April 2024 . Retrieved 2 April 2024 . External links  edit  Finding and Removing Backdoors Three Archaic Backdoor Trojan Programs That Still Serve Great Pranks Archived 20150527 at the Wayback Machine Backdoors removal  List of backdoors and their removal instructions. FAQ Farms Backdoors FAQ  wiki question and answer forum List of backdoors and Removal v t e Information security Related security categories Computer security Automotive security Cybercrime Cybersex trafficking Computer fraud Cybergeddon Cyberterrorism Cyberwarfare Electromagnetic warfare Information warfare Internet security Mobile security Network security Copy protection Digital rights management vectorial version Threats Adware Advanced persistent threat Arbitrary code execution Backdoors Bombs Fork Logic Time Zip Hardware backdoors Code injection Crimeware Crosssite scripting Crosssite leaks DOM clobbering History sniffing Cryptojacking Botnets Data breach Driveby download Browser Helper Objects Viruses Data scraping Denialofservice attack Eavesdropping Email fraud Email spoofing Exploits Fraudulent dialers Hacktivism Infostealer Insecure direct object reference Keystroke loggers Malware Payload Phishing Voice Polymorphic engine Privilege escalation Ransomware Rootkits Scareware Shellcode Spamming Social engineering Spyware Software bugs Trojan horses Hardware Trojans Remote access trojans Vulnerability Web shells Wiper Worms SQL injection Rogue security software Zombie Defenses Application security Secure coding Secure by default Secure by design Misuse case Computer access control Authentication Multifactor authentication Authorization Computer security software Antivirus software Securityfocused operating system Datacentric security Obfuscation software Data masking Encryption Firewall Intrusion detection system Hostbased intrusion detection system HIDS Anomaly detection Information security management Information risk management Security information and event management SIEM Runtime application selfprotection Site isolation v t e Malware topics Infectious malware Comparison of computer viruses Computer virus Computer worm List of computer worms Timeline of computer viruses and worms Concealment Backdoor Clickjacking Maninthebrowser Maninthemiddle Rootkit Trojan horse Zombie computer Malware for profit Adware Botnet Crimeware Fleeceware Form grabbing Fraudulent dialer Infostealer Keystroke logging Malbot Privacyinvasive software Ransomware Rogue security software Scareware Spyware Web threats By operating system Android malware Classic Mac OS viruses iOS malware Linux malware MacOS malware Macro virus Mobile malware Palm OS viruses HyperCard viruses Protection Antikeylogger Antivirus software Browser security Data loss prevention software Defensive computing Firewall Internet security Intrusion detection system Mobile security Network security Countermeasures Computer and network surveillance Honeypot Operation Bot Roast Authority control databases  National Germany Portal  Business and economics