Group that provides security feedback A blue team is a group of individuals who perform an analysis of information systems to ensure security identify security flaws verify the effectiveness of each security measure and make certain all security measures will continue to be effective after implementation.  1  Some blue team objectives include Using risk intelligence and digital footprint analysis to find and fix vulnerabilities and prevent possible security incidents. Conduct regular security audits such as incident response and recovery.  2  History  edit  As part of the United States computer security defense initiative red teams were developed to exploit other malicious entities that would do them harm. As a result blue teams were developed to design defensive measures against such red team activities.  3  Incident response  edit  If an incident does occur within the organization the blue team will perform the following six steps to handle the situation Preparation Identification Containment Eradication Recovery Lessons learned  4  Operating system hardening  edit  In preparation for a computer security incident the blue team will perform hardening techniques on all operating systems throughout the organization.  5  Perimeter defense  edit  The blue team must always be mindful of the network perimeter including traffic flow packet filtering proxy firewalls and intrusion detection systems.  5  Tools  edit  Blue teams employ a wide range of tools allowing them to detect an attack collect forensic data perform data analysis and make changes to threat future attacks and mitigate threats. The tools include Log management and analysis  edit  AlienVault Graylog InTrust LogRhythm Microsoft Sentinel NetWitness Rapid7 SolarWinds Splunk Security information and event management SIEM technology  edit  SIEM software supports threat detection and security incident response by performing realtime data collection and analysis of security events. This type of software also uses data sources outside of the network including indicators of compromise IoC threat intelligence . See also  edit  List of digital forensics tools Vulnerability management White hat computer security Red team References  edit   Sypris Electronics. DoDD 8570.1 Blue Team . Sypris Electronics . Archived from the original on April 25 2016 . Retrieved July 3 2016 .  What is Blue Team  IBM . www.ibm.com . 20231214 . Retrieved 20240907 .  Johnson Rowland. How your red team penetration testers can help improve your blue team . SC Magazine . Archived from the original on May 30 2016 . Retrieved July 3 2016 .  Murdoch Don 2014. Blue Team Handbook Incident Response Edition 2nd ed.. reateSpace Independent Publishing Platform. ISBN 9781500734756 .  a b SANS Institute. Cyber Guardian Blue Team . SANS . SANS Institute . Retrieved July 3 2016 .