Protection of computer systems from information disclosure theft or damage Part of a series on Computer hacking History Phreaking Cryptovirology Hacking of consumer electronics List of hackers Hacker culture and ethic Hackathon Hacker Manifesto Hackerspace Hacktivism Maker culture Types of hackers Black hat Grey hat White hat Conferences Black Hat Briefings Chaos Communication Congress DEF CON Hackers on Planet Earth Security BSides ShmooCon Summercon Computer crime Crimeware List of computer criminals Script kiddie Hacking tools Exploit forensicsfocused operating systems Payload Social engineering Vulnerability Practice sites HackThisSite ZoneH Malware Rootkit Backdoor Trojan horse Virus Worm Spyware Ransomware Logic bomb Botnet Keystroke logging HIDS Web shell RCE Infostealer Computer security Application security Cloud computing security Network security Groups Anonymous Chaos Computer Club Homebrew Computer Club defunct Legion of Doom defunct LulzSec defunct Masters of Deception defunct Red team  Blue team Publications 2600 The Hacker Quarterly Hacker News Nuts and Volts Phrack v t e Operating systems Common features Process management Interrupts Memory management File system Device drivers Networking Security Inputoutput v t e An example of a physical security measure a metal lock on the back of a personal computer to prevent hardware tampering. Computer security also cybersecurity  digital security  or information technology IT security  is the protection of computer software  systems and networks from threats that can lead to unauthorized information disclosure theft or damage to hardware  software  or data  as well as from the disruption or misdirection of the services they provide.  1   2  The significance of the field stems from the expanded reliance on computer systems  the Internet   3  and wireless network standards . Its importance is further amplified by the growth of smart devices  including smartphones  televisions  and the various devices that constitute the Internet of things IoT. Cybersecurity has emerged as one of the most significant new challenges facing the contemporary world due to both the complexity of information systems and the societies they support. Security is particularly crucial for systems that govern largescale systems with farreaching physical effects such as power distribution  elections  and finance .  4   5  Although many aspects of computer security involve digital security such as electronic passwords and encryption  physical security measures such as metal locks are still used to prevent unauthorized tampering. IT security is not a perfect subset of information security  therefore does not  completely align into the security convergence schema. Vulnerabilities and attacks  edit  Main article Vulnerability computing A vulnerability refers to a flaw in the structure execution functioning or internal oversight of a computer or system that compromises its security. Most of the vulnerabilities that have been discovered are documented in the Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures CVE database.  6  An exploitable vulnerability is one for which at least one working attack or exploit exists.  7  Actors maliciously seeking vulnerabilities are known as threats . Vulnerabilities can be researched reverseengineered hunted or exploited using automated tools or customized scripts.  8   9  Various people or parties are vulnerable to cyber attacks however different groups are likely to experience different types of attacks more than others.  10  In April 2023 the United Kingdom Department for Science Innovation  Technology released a report on cyber attacks over the previous 12 months.  11  They surveyed 2263 UK businesses 1174 UK registered charities and 554 education institutions. The research found that 32 of businesses and 24 of charities overall recall any breaches or attacks from the last 12 months. These figures were much higher for medium businesses 59 large businesses 69 and highincome charities with 500000 or more in annual income 56.  11  Yet although medium or large businesses are more often the victims since larger companies have generally improved their security over the last decade small and midsize businesses SMBs have also become increasingly vulnerable as they often do not have advanced tools to defend the business.  10  SMBs are most likely to be affected by malware ransomware phishing maninthemiddle attacks  and Denialof Service DoS Attacks.  10  Normal internet users are most likely to be affected by untargeted cyberattacks.  12  These are where attackers indiscriminately target as many devices services or users as possible. They do this using techniques that take advantage of the openness of the Internet. These strategies mostly include phishing  ransomware  water holing and scanning.  12  To secure a computer system it is important to understand the attacks that can be made against it and these threats can typically be classified into one of the following categories Backdoor  edit  A backdoor in a computer system a cryptosystem  or an algorithm is any secret method of bypassing normal authentication or security controls. These weaknesses may exist for many reasons including original design or poor configuration.  13  Due to the nature of backdoors they are of greater concern to companies and databases as opposed to individuals. Backdoors may be added by an authorized party to allow some legitimate access or by an attacker for malicious reasons. Criminals often use malware to install backdoors giving them remote administrative access to a system.  14  Once they have access cybercriminals can modify files steal personal information install unwanted software and even take control of the entire computer.  14  Backdoors can be very hard to detect and are usually discovered by someone who has access to the application source code or intimate knowledge of the operating system of the computer. Denialofservice attack  edit  Denialofservice attacks DoS are designed to make a machine or network resource unavailable to its intended users.  15  Attackers can deny service to individual victims such as by deliberately entering a wrong password enough consecutive times to cause the victims account to be locked or they may overload the capabilities of a machine or network and block all users at once. While a network attack from a single IP address can be blocked by adding a new firewall rule many forms of distributed denialofservice DDoS attacks are possible where the attack comes from a large number of points. In this case defending against these attacks is much more difficult. Such attacks can originate from the zombie computers of a botnet or from a range of other possible techniques including distributed reflective denialofservice DRDoS where innocent systems are fooled into sending traffic to the victim.  15  With such attacks the amplification factor makes the attack easier for the attacker because they have to use little bandwidth themselves. To understand why attackers may carry out these attacks see the attacker motivation section. Physical access attacks  edit  Main article Physical access A directaccess attack is when an unauthorized user an attacker gains physical access to a computer most likely to directly copy data from it or steal information.  16  Attackers may also compromise security by making operating system modifications installing software worms  keyloggers  covert listening devices or using wireless microphones. Even when the system is protected by standard security measures these may be bypassed by booting another operating system or tool from a CDROM or other bootable media. Disk encryption and the Trusted Platform Module standard are designed to prevent these attacks. Direct service attackers are related in concept to direct memory attacks which allow an attacker to gain direct access to a computers memory.  17  The attacks take advantage of a feature of modern computers that allows certain devices such as external hard drives graphics cards or network cards to access the computers memory directly.  17  Eavesdropping  edit  Eavesdropping is the act of surreptitiously listening to a private computer conversation communication usually between hosts on a network. It typically occurs when a user connects to a network where traffic is not secured or encrypted and sends sensitive business data to a colleague which when listened to by an attacker could be exploited.  18  Data transmitted across an open network allows an attacker to exploit a vulnerability and intercept it via various methods. Unlike malware  directaccess attacks or other forms of cyber attacks eavesdropping attacks are unlikely to negatively affect the performance of networks or devices making them difficult to notice.  18  In fact the attacker does not need to have any ongoing connection to the software at all. The attacker can insert the software onto a compromised device perhaps by direct insertion or perhaps by a virus or other malware and then come back some time later to retrieve any data that is found or trigger the software to send the data at some determined time.  19  Using a virtual private network VPN which encrypts data between two points is one of the most common forms of protection against eavesdropping. Using the best form of encryption possible for wireless networks is best practice as well as using HTTPS instead of an unencrypted HTTP .  20  Programs such as Carnivore and NarusInSight have been used by the Federal Bureau of Investigation FBI and NSA to eavesdrop on the systems of internet service providers . Even machines that operate as a closed system i.e. with no contact with the outside world can be eavesdropped upon by monitoring the faint electromagnetic transmissions generated by the hardware. TEMPEST is a specification by the NSA referring to these attacks. Malware  edit  Malicious software  malware  is any software code or computer program intentionally written to harm a computer system or its users.  21  Once present on a computer it can leak sensitive details such as personal information business information and passwords can give control of the system to the attacker and can corrupt or delete data permanently.  22  Another type of malware is ransomware  which is when malware installs itself onto a victims machine encrypts their files and then turns around and demands a ransom usually in Bitcoin  to return that data to the user.  23  Types of malware include some of the following Viruses are a specific type of malware and are normally a malicious code that hijacks software with the intention to do damage and spread copies of itself. Copies are made with the aim to spread to other programs on a computer.  21  Worms are similar to viruses however viruses can only function when a user runs opens a compromised program. Worms are selfreplicating malware that spread between programs apps and devices without the need for human interaction.  21  Trojan horses are programs that pretend to be helpful or hide themselves within desired or legitimate software to trick users into installing them. Once installed a RAT remote access trojan can create a secret backdoor on the affected device to cause damage.  21  Spyware is a type of malware that secretly gathers information from an infected computer and transmits the sensitive information back to the attacker. One of the most common forms of spyware are keyloggers  which record all of a users keyboard inputskeystrokes to allow hackers to harvest usernames passwords bank account and credit card numbers.  21  Scareware  as the name suggests is a form of malware which uses social engineering manipulation to scare shock  trigger anxiety  or suggest the perception of a threat in order to manipulate users into buying or installing unwanted software . These attacks often begin with a sudden popup with an urgent message usually warning the user that theyve broken the law or their device has a virus.  21  Maninthemiddle attacks  edit  Maninthemiddle attacks MITM involve a malicious attacker trying to intercept surveil or modify communications between two parties by spoofing one or both partys identities and injecting themselves inbetween.  24  Types of MITM attacks include IP address spoofing is where the attacker hijacks routing protocols to reroute the targets traffic to a vulnerable network node for traffic interception or injection. Message spoofing via email SMS or OTT messaging is where the attacker spoofs the identity or carrier service while the target is using messaging protocols like email SMS or OTT IPbased messaging apps. The attacker can then monitor conversations launch social attacks or trigger zerodayvulnerabilities to allow for further attacks. WiFi SSID spoofing is where the attacker simulates a WIFI base station SSID to capture and modify internet traffic and transactions. The attacker can also use local network addressing and reduced network defenses to penetrate the targets firewall by breaching known vulnerabilities. Sometimes known as a Pineapple attack thanks to a popular device. See also Malicious association . DNS spoofing is where attackers hijack domain name assignments to redirect traffic to systems under the attackers control in order to surveil traffic or launch other attacks. SSL hijacking typically coupled with another medialevel MITM attack is where the attacker spoofs the SSL authentication and encryption protocol by way of Certificate Authority injection in order to decrypt surveil and modify traffic. See also TLS interception  24  Multivector polymorphic attacks  edit  Surfacing in 2017 a new class of multivector  25  polymorphic  26  cyber threats combine several types of attacks and change form to avoid cybersecurity controls as they spread. Multivector polymorphic attacks as the name describes are both multivectored and polymorphic.  27  Firstly they are a singular attack that involves multiple methods of attack. In this sense they are multivectored i.e. the attack can use multiple means of propagation such as via the Web email and applications. However  they are also multistaged meaning that they can infiltrate networks and move laterally inside the network.  27  The attacks can be polymorphic meaning that the cyberattacks used such as viruses worms or trojans constantly change morph making it nearly impossible to detect them using signaturebased defences.  27  Phishing  edit  An example of a phishing email disguised as an official email from a fictional bank. The sender is attempting to trick the recipient into revealing confidential information by confirming it at the phishers website. Note the misspelling of the words received and discrepancy as rec ie ved and discrep e ncy respectively. Although the URL of the banks webpage appears to be legitimate the hyperlink points at the phishers webpage. Phishing is the attempt of acquiring sensitive information such as usernames passwords and credit card details directly from users by deceiving the users.  28  Phishing is typically carried out by email spoofing  instant messaging  text message  or on a phone call. They often direct users to enter details at a fake website whose look and feel are almost identical to the legitimate one.  29  The fake website often asks for personal information such as login details and passwords. This information can then be used to gain access to the individuals real account on the real website. Preying on a victims trust phishing can be classified as a form of social engineering . Attackers can use creative ways to gain access to real accounts. A common scam is for attackers to send fake electronic invoices  30  to individuals showing that they recently purchased music apps or others and instructing them to click on a link if the purchases were not authorized. A more strategic type of phishing is spearphishing which leverages personal or organizationspecific details to make the attacker appear like a trusted source. Spearphishing attacks target specific individuals rather than the broad net cast by phishing attempts.  31  Privilege escalation  edit  Privilege escalation describes a situation where an attacker with some level of restricted access is able to without authorization elevate their privileges or access level.  32  For example a standard computer user may be able to exploit a vulnerability in the system to gain access to restricted data or even become root and have full unrestricted access to a system. The severity of attacks can range from attacks simply sending an unsolicited email to a ransomware attack on large amounts of data. Privilege escalation usually starts with social engineering techniques often phishing .  32  Privilege escalation can be separated into two strategies horizontal and vertical privilege escalation Horizontal escalation or account takeover is where an attacker gains access to a normal user account that has relatively lowlevel privileges. This may be through stealing the users username and password. Once they have access they have gained a foothold and using this foothold the attacker then may move around the network of users at this same lower level gaining access to information of this similar privilege.  32  Vertical escalation however targets people higher up in a company and often with more administrative power such as an employee in IT with a higher privilege. Using this privileged account will then enable the attacker to invade other accounts.  32  Sidechannel attack  edit  Main article Sidechannel attack Any computational system affects its environment in some form. This effect it has on its environment can range from electromagnetic radiation to residual effect on RAM cells which as a consequence make a Cold boot attack possible to hardware implementation faults that allow for access or guessing of other values that normally should be inaccessible. In Sidechannel attack scenarios the attacker would gather such information about a system or network to guess its internal state and as a result access the information which is assumed by the victim to be secure. The target information in a side channel can be challenging to detect due to its low amplitude when combined with other signals  33  Social engineering  edit  Social engineering  in the context of computer security aims to convince a user to disclose secrets such as passwords card numbers etc. or grant physical access by for example impersonating a senior executive bank a contractor or a customer.  34  This generally involves exploiting peoples trust and relying on their cognitive biases . A common scam involves emails sent to accounting and finance department personnel impersonating their CEO and urgently requesting some action. One of the main techniques of social engineering are phishing attacks. In early 2016 the FBI reported that such business email compromise BEC scams had cost US businesses more than 2 billion in about two years.  35  In May 2016 the Milwaukee Bucks NBA team was the victim of this type of cyber scam with a perpetrator impersonating the teams president Peter Feigin  resulting in the handover of all the teams employees 2015 W2 tax forms.  36  Spoofing  edit  Main article Spoofing attack Spoofing is an act of pretending to be a valid entity through the falsification of data such as an IP address or username in order to gain access to information or resources that one is otherwise unauthorized to obtain. Spoofing is closely related to phishing .  37   38  There are several types of spoofing including Email spoofing  is where an attacker forges the sending  From  or source address of an email. IP address spoofing  where an attacker alters the source IP address in a network packet to hide their identity or impersonate another computing system. MAC spoofing  where an attacker modifies the Media Access Control MAC address of their network interface controller to obscure their identity or to pose as another. Biometric spoofing where an attacker produces a fake biometric sample to pose as another user.  39  Address Resolution Protocol ARP spoofing where an attacker sends spoofed address resolution protocol onto a local area network to associate their Media Access Control address with a different hosts IP address. This causes data to be sent to the attacker rather than the intended host. In 2018 the cybersecurity firm Trellix published research on the lifethreatening risk of spoofing in the healthcare industry.  40  Tampering  edit  Tampering describes a malicious modification or alteration of data. It is an intentional but unauthorized act resulting in the modification of a system components of systems its intended behavior or data. Socalled Evil Maid attacks and security services planting of surveillance capability into routers are examples.  41  HTML smuggling  edit  HTML smuggling allows an attacker to smuggle a malicious code inside a particular HTML or web page.  42  HTML files can carry payloads concealed as benign inert data in order to defeat content filters . These payloads can be reconstructed on the other side of the filter.  43  When a target user opens the HTML the malicious code is activated the web browser then decodes the script which then unleashes the malware onto the targets device.  42  Information security practices  edit  Employee behavior can have a big impact on information security in organizations. Cultural concepts can help different segments of the organization work effectively or work against effectiveness toward information security within an organization. Information security culture is the ...totality of patterns of behavior in an organization that contributes to the protection of information of all kinds.  44  Andersson and Reimers 2014 found that employees often do not see themselves as part of their organizations information security effort and often take actions that impede organizational changes.  45  Indeed the Verizon Data Breach Investigations Report 2020 which examined 3950 security breaches discovered 30 of cybersecurity incidents involved internal actors within a company.  46  Research shows information security culture needs to be improved continuously. In Information Security Culture from Analysis to Change authors commented Its a neverending process a cycle of evaluation and change or maintenance. To manage the information security culture five steps should be taken preevaluation strategic planning operative planning implementation and postevaluation.  47  Preevaluation To identify the awareness of information security within employees and to analyze the current security policies. Strategic planning To come up with a better awareness program clear targets need to be set. Assembling a team of skilled professionals is helpful to achieve it. Operative planning A good security culture can be established based on internal communication management buyin security awareness and a training program.  47  Implementation Four stages should be used to implement the information security culture. They are Commitment of the management Communication with organizational members Courses for all organizational members Commitment of the employees  47  Postevaluation To assess the success of the planning and implementation and to identify unresolved areas of concern. Computer protection countermeasures  edit  In computer security a countermeasure is an action device procedure or technique that reduces a threat a vulnerability or an attack by eliminating or preventing it by minimizing the harm it can cause or by discovering and reporting it so that corrective action can be taken.  48   49   50  Some common countermeasures are listed in the following sections Security by design  edit  Main article Secure by design Security by design or alternately secure by design means that the software has been designed from the ground up to be secure. In this case security is considered a main feature. The UK governments National Cyber Security Centre separates secure cyber design principles into five sections  51  Before a secure system is created or updated companies should ensure they understand the fundamentals and the context around the system they are trying to create and identify any weaknesses in the system. Companies should design and centre their security around techniques and defences which make attacking their data or systems inherently more challenging for attackers. Companies should ensure that their core services that rely on technology are protected so that the systems are essentially never down. Although systems can be created which are safe against a multitude of attacks that does not mean that attacks will not be attempted. Despite ones security all companies systems should aim to be able to detect and spot attacks as soon as they occur to ensure the most effective response to them. Companies should create secure systems designed so that any attack that is successful has minimal severity. These design principles of security by design can include some of the following techniques The principle of least privilege  where each part of the system has only the privileges that are needed for its function. That way even if an attacker gains access to that part they only have limited access to the whole system. Automated theorem proving to prove the correctness of crucial software subsystems. Code reviews and unit testing  approaches to make modules more secure where formal correctness proofs are not possible. Defense in depth  where the design is such that more than one subsystem needs to be violated to compromise the integrity of the system and the information it holds. Default secure settings and design to fail secure rather than fail insecure see failsafe for the equivalent in safety engineering . Ideally a secure system should require a deliberate conscious knowledgeable and free decision on the part of legitimate authorities in order to make it insecure. Audit trails track system activity so that when a security breach occurs the mechanism and extent of the breach can be determined. Storing audit trails remotely where they can only be appended to can keep intruders from covering their tracks. Full disclosure of all vulnerabilities to ensure that the window of vulnerability is kept as short as possible when bugs are discovered. Security architecture  edit  Security architecture can be defined as the practice of designing computer systems to achieve security goals.  52  These goals have overlap with the principles of security by design explored above including to make initial compromise of the system difficult and to limit the impact of any compromise.  52  In practice the role of a security architect would be to ensure the structure of a system reinforces the security of the system and that new changes are safe and meet the security requirements of the organization.  53   54  Similarly Techopedia defines security architecture as a unified security design that addresses the necessities and potential risks involved in a certain scenario or environment. It also specifies when and where to apply security controls. The design process is generally reproducible. The key attributes of security architecture are  55  the relationship of different components and how they depend on each other. determination of controls based on risk assessment good practices finances and legal matters. the standardization of controls. Practicing security architecture provides the right foundation to systematically address business IT and security concerns in an organization. Security measures  edit  A state of computer security is the conceptual ideal attained by the use of three processes threat prevention detection and response. These processes are based on various policies and system components which include the following Limiting the access of individuals using user account access controls and using cryptography can protect systems files and data respectively. Firewalls are by far the most common prevention systems from a network security perspective as they can if properly configured shield access to internal network services and block certain kinds of attacks through packet filtering. Firewalls can be both hardware and softwarebased. Firewalls monitor and control incoming and outgoing traffic of a computer network and establish a barrier between a trusted network and an untrusted network.  56  Intrusion Detection System IDS products are designed to detect network attacks inprogress and assist in postattack forensics  while audit trails and logs serve a similar function for individual systems. Response is necessarily defined by the assessed security requirements of an individual system and may cover the range from simple upgrade of protections to notification of legal authorities counterattacks and the like. In some special cases the complete destruction of the compromised system is favored as it may happen that not all the compromised resources are detected. Cyber security awareness training to cope with cyber threats and attacks.  57  Forward web proxy solutions can prevent the client to visit malicious web pages and inspect the content before downloading to the client machines. Today computer security consists mainly of preventive measures like firewalls or an exit procedure . A firewall can be defined as a way of filtering network data between a host or a network and another network such as the Internet . They can be implemented as software running on the machine hooking into the network stack or in the case of most UNIX based operating systems such as Linux  built into the operating system kernel  to provide realtime filtering and blocking.  56  Another implementation is a socalled physical firewall  which consists of a separate machine filtering network traffic. Firewalls are common amongst machines that are permanently connected to the Internet. Some organizations are turning to big data platforms such as Apache Hadoop  to extend data accessibility and machine learning to detect advanced persistent threats .  58  In order to ensure adequate security the confidentiality integrity and availability of a network better known as the CIA triad must be protected and is considered the foundation to information security.  59  To achieve those objectives administrative physical and technical security measures should be employed. The amount of security afforded to an asset can only be determined when its value is known.  60  Vulnerability management  edit  Main article Vulnerability management Vulnerability management is the cycle of identifying fixing or mitigating vulnerabilities   61  especially in software and firmware . Vulnerability management is integral to computer security and network security . Vulnerabilities can be discovered with a vulnerability scanner  which analyzes a computer system in search of known vulnerabilities  62  such as open ports  insecure software configuration and susceptibility to malware .  In order for these tools to be effective they must be kept up to date with every new update the vendor release.  Typically these updates will scan for the new vulnerabilities that were introduced recently. Beyond vulnerability scanning many organizations contract outside security auditors to run regular penetration tests against their systems to identify vulnerabilities. In some sectors this is a contractual requirement.  63  Reducing vulnerabilities  edit  The act of assessing and reducing vulnerabilities to cyber attacks is commonly referred to as information technology security assessments . They aim to assess systems for risk and to predict and test for their vulnerabilities. While formal verification of the correctness of computer systems is possible  64   65  it is not yet common. Operating systems formally verified include seL4   66  and SYSGO s PikeOS  67   68   but these make up a very small percentage of the market. It is possible to reduce an attackers chances by keeping systems up to date with security patches and updates and by hiring people with expertise in security. Large companies with significant threats can hire Security Operations Centre SOC Analysts. These are specialists in cyber defences with their role ranging from conducting threat analysis to investigating reports of any new issues and preparing and testing disaster recovery plans.  69  Whilst no measures can completely guarantee the prevention of an attack these measures can help mitigate the damage of possible attacks. The effects of data lossdamage can be also reduced by careful backing up and insurance . Outside of formal assessments there are various methods of reducing vulnerabilities. Two factor authentication is a method for mitigating unauthorized access to a system or sensitive information.  70  It requires something you know a password or PIN and something you have  a card dongle cellphone or another piece of hardware. This increases security as an unauthorized person needs both of these to gain access. Protecting against social engineering and direct computer access physical attacks can only happen by noncomputer means which can be difficult to enforce relative to the sensitivity of the information. Training is often involved to help mitigate this risk by improving peoples knowledge of how to protect themselves and by increasing peoples awareness of threats.  71  However even in highly disciplined environments e.g. military organizations social engineering attacks can still be difficult to foresee and prevent. Inoculation derived from inoculation theory  seeks to prevent social engineering and other fraudulent tricks and traps by instilling a resistance to persuasion attempts through exposure to similar or related attempts.  72  Hardware protection mechanisms  edit  See also Computer security compromised by hardware failure Hardwarebased or assisted computer security also offers an alternative to softwareonly computer security. Using devices and methods such as dongles  trusted platform modules  intrusionaware cases drive locks disabling USB ports and mobileenabled access may be considered more secure due to the physical access or sophisticated backdoor access required in order to be compromised. Each of these is covered in more detail below. USB dongles are typically used in software licensing schemes to unlock software capabilities  73  but they can also be seen as a way to prevent unauthorized access to a computer or other devices software. The dongle or key essentially creates a secure encrypted tunnel between the software application and the key. The principle is that an encryption scheme on the dongle such as Advanced Encryption Standard AES provides a stronger measure of security since it is harder to hack and replicate the dongle than to simply copy the native software to another machine and use it. Another security application for dongles is to use them for accessing webbased content such as cloud software or Virtual Private Networks VPNs.  74  In addition a USB dongle can be configured to lock or unlock a computer.  75  Trusted platform modules TPMs secure devices by integrating cryptographic capabilities onto access devices through the use of microprocessors or socalled computersonachip. TPMs used in conjunction with serverside software offer a way to detect and authenticate hardware devices preventing unauthorized network and data access.  76  Computer case intrusion detection refers to a device typically a pushbutton switch which detects when a computer case is opened. The firmware or BIOS is programmed to show an alert to the operator when the computer is booted up the next time. Drive locks are essentially software tools to encrypt hard drives making them inaccessible to thieves.  77  Tools exist specifically for encrypting external drives as well.  78  Disabling USB ports is a security option for preventing unauthorized and malicious access to an otherwise secure computer. Infected USB dongles connected to a network from a computer inside the firewall are considered by the magazine Network World as the most common hardware threat facing computer networks. Disconnecting or disabling peripheral devices like camera GPS removable storage etc. that are not in use.  79  Mobileenabled access devices are growing in popularity due to the ubiquitous nature of cell phones.  80  Builtin capabilities such as Bluetooth  the newer Bluetooth low energy LE nearfield communication NFC on noniOS devices and biometric validation such as thumbprint readers as well as QR code reader software designed for mobile devices offer new secure ways for mobile phones to connect to access control systems. These control systems provide computer security and can also be used for controlling access to secure buildings.  81  IOMMUs allow for hardwarebased sandboxing of components in mobile and desktop computers by utilizing direct memory access protections.  82   83  Physical Unclonable Functions PUFs can be used as a digital fingerprint or a unique identifier to integrated circuits and hardware providing users the ability to secure the hardware supply chains going into their systems.  84   85  Secure operating systems  edit  Main article Securityevaluated operating system One use of the term computer security refers to technology that is used to implement secure operating systems . Using secure operating systems is a good way of ensuring computer security. These are systems that have achieved certification from an external securityauditing organization the most popular evaluations are Common Criteria CC.  86  Secure coding  edit  Main article Secure coding In software engineering secure coding aims to guard against the accidental introduction of security vulnerabilities. It is also possible to create software designed from the ground up to be secure. Such systems are secure by design . Beyond this formal verification aims to prove the correctness of the algorithms underlying a system  87  important for cryptographic protocols for example. Capabilities and access control lists  edit  Main articles Access control list  Rolebased access control  and Capabilitybased security Within computer systems two of the main security models capable of enforcing privilege separation are access control lists ACLs and rolebased access control RBAC. An accesscontrol list ACL with respect to a computer file system is a list of permissions associated with an object. An ACL specifies which users or system processes are granted access to objects as well as what operations are allowed on given objects. Rolebased access control is an approach to restricting system access to authorized users  88   89   90  used by the majority of enterprises with more than 500 employees  91  and can implement mandatory access control MAC or discretionary access control DAC. A further approach capabilitybased security has been mostly restricted to research operating systems. Capabilities can however also be implemented at the language level leading to a style of programming that is essentially a refinement of standard objectoriented design. An opensource project in the area is the E language . User security training  edit  The enduser is widely recognized as the weakest link in the security chain  92  and it is estimated that more than 90 of security incidents and breaches involve some kind of human error.  93   94  Among the most commonly recorded forms of errors and misjudgment are poor password management sending emails containing sensitive data and attachments to the wrong recipient the inability to recognize misleading URLs and to identify fake websites and dangerous email attachments.  A common mistake that users make is saving their user idpassword in their browsers to make it easier to log in to banking sites.  This is a gift to attackers who have obtained access to a machine by some means.  The risk may be mitigated by the use of twofactor authentication.  95  As the human component of cyber risk is particularly relevant in determining the global cyber risk  96  an organization is facing security awareness training at all levels not only provides formal compliance with regulatory and industry mandates but is considered essential  97  in reducing cyber risk and protecting individuals and companies from the great majority of cyber threats. The focus on the enduser represents a profound cultural change for many security practitioners who have traditionally approached cybersecurity exclusively from a technical perspective and moves along the lines suggested by major security centers  98  to develop a culture of cyber awareness within the organization recognizing that a securityaware user provides an important line of defense against cyber attacks. Digital hygiene  edit  Related to enduser training digital hygiene or cyber hygiene is a fundamental principle relating to information security and as the analogy with personal hygiene shows is the equivalent of establishing simple routine measures to minimize the risks from cyber threats. The assumption is that good cyber hygiene practices can give networked users another layer of protection reducing the risk that one vulnerable node will be used to either mount attacks or compromise another node or network especially from common cyberattacks.  99  Cyber hygiene should also not be mistaken for proactive cyber defence  a military term.  100  The most common acts of digital hygiene can include updating malware protection cloud backups passwords and ensuring restricted admin rights and network firewalls.  101  As opposed to a purely technologybased defense against threats cyber hygiene mostly regards routine measures that are technically simple to implement and mostly dependent on discipline  102  or education.  103  It can be thought of as an abstract list of tips or measures that have been demonstrated as having a positive effect on personal or collective digital security. As such these measures can be performed by laypeople not just security experts. Cyber hygiene relates to personal hygiene as computer viruses relate to biological viruses or pathogens. However while the term computer virus was coined almost simultaneously with the creation of the first working computer viruses  104  the term cyber hygiene is a much later invention perhaps as late as 2000  105  by Internet pioneer Vint Cerf . It has since been adopted by the Congress  106  and Senate of the United States  107  the FBI  108  EU institutions  99  and heads of state.  100  Difficulty of responding to breaches  edit  Responding to attempted security breaches is often very difficult for a variety of reasons including Identifying attackers is difficult as they may operate through proxies temporary anonymous dialup accounts wireless connections and other anonymizing procedures which make backtracing difficult  and are often located in another jurisdiction . If they successfully breach security they have also often gained enough administrative access to enable them to delete logs to cover their tracks. The sheer number of attempted attacks often by automated vulnerability scanners and computer worms is so large that organizations cannot spend time pursuing each. Law enforcement officers often lack the skills interest or budget to pursue attackers. Furthermore identifying attackers across a network may necessitate collecting logs from multiple locations within the network and across various countries a process that can be both difficult and timeconsuming. Where an attack succeeds and a breach occurs many jurisdictions now have in place mandatory security breach notification laws . Types of security and privacy  edit  Access control Antikeyloggers Antimalware Antispyware Antisubversion software Antitamper software Antitheft Antivirus software Cryptographic software Computeraided dispatch CAD Data loss prevention software Firewall Intrusion detection system IDS Intrusion prevention system IPS Log management software Parental control Records management Sandbox Security information management Security information and event management SIEM Software and operating system updating Vulnerability Management Systems at risk  edit  The growth in the number of computer systems and the increasing reliance upon them by individuals businesses industries and governments means that there are an increasing number of systems at risk. Financial systems  edit  The computer systems of financial regulators and financial institutions like the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission  SWIFT investment banks and commercial banks are prominent hacking targets for cybercriminals interested in manipulating markets and making illicit gains.  109  Websites and apps that accept or store credit card numbers  brokerage accounts and bank account information are also prominent hacking targets because of the potential for immediate financial gain from transferring money making purchases or selling the information on the black market .  110  Instore payment systems and ATMs have also been tampered with in order to gather customer account data and PINs . The UCLA Internet Report Surveying the Digital Future 2000 found that the privacy of personal data created barriers to online sales and that more than nine out of 10 internet users were somewhat or very concerned about credit card security.  111  The most common web technologies for improving security between browsers and websites are named SSL Secure Sockets Layer and its successor TLS  Transport Layer Security  identity management and authentication services and domain name services allow companies and consumers to engage in secure communications and commerce. Several versions of SSL and TLS are commonly used today in applications such as web browsing email internet faxing instant messaging  and VoIP voiceoverIP. There are various interoperable implementations of these technologies including at least one implementation that is open source . Open source allows anyone to view the applications source code  and look for and report vulnerabilities. The credit card companies Visa and MasterCard cooperated to develop the secure EMV chip which is embedded in credit cards. Further developments include the Chip Authentication Program where banks give customers handheld card readers to perform online secure transactions. Other developments in this arena include the development of technology such as Instant Issuance which has enabled shopping mall kiosks acting on behalf of banks to issue onthespot credit cards to interested customers. Utilities and industrial equipment  edit  Computers control functions at many utilities including coordination of telecommunications  the power grid  nuclear power plants  and valve opening and closing in water and gas networks. The Internet is a potential attack vector for such machines if connected but the Stuxnet worm demonstrated that even equipment controlled by computers not connected to the Internet can be vulnerable. In 2014 the Computer Emergency Readiness Team  a division of the Department of Homeland Security  investigated 79 hacking incidents at energy companies.  112  Aviation  edit  The aviation industry is very reliant on a series of complex systems which could be attacked.  113  A simple power outage at one airport can cause repercussions worldwide  114  much of the system relies on radio transmissions which could be disrupted  115  and controlling aircraft over oceans is especially dangerous because radar surveillance only extends 175 to 225 miles offshore.  116  There is also potential for attack from within an aircraft.  117  Implementing fixes in aerospace systems poses a unique challenge because efficient air transportation is heavily affected by weight and volume. Improving security by adding physical devices to airplanes could increase their unloaded weight and could potentially reduce cargo or passenger capacity.  118  In Europe with the  PanEuropean Network Service   119  and NewPENS  120  and in the US with the NextGen program  121  air navigation service providers are moving to create their own dedicated networks. Many modern passports are now biometric passports  containing an embedded microchip that stores a digitized photograph and personal information such as name gender and date of birth. In addition more countries  which  are introducing facial recognition technology to reduce identityrelated fraud . The introduction of the ePassport has assisted border officials in verifying the identity of the passport holder thus allowing for quick passenger processing.  122  Plans are under way in the US the UK  and Australia to introduce SmartGate kiosks with both retina and fingerprint recognition technology.  123  The airline industry is moving from the use of traditional paper tickets towards the use of electronic tickets etickets. These have been made possible by advances in online credit card transactions in partnership with the airlines. Longdistance bus companies  which  are also switching over to eticketing transactions today. The consequences of a successful attack range from loss of confidentiality to loss of system integrity air traffic control outages loss of aircraft and even loss of life. Consumer devices  edit  Desktop computers and laptops are commonly targeted to gather passwords or financial account information or to construct a botnet to attack another target. Smartphones  tablet computers  smart watches  and other mobile devices such as quantified self devices like activity trackers have sensors such as cameras microphones GPS receivers compasses and accelerometers which could be exploited and may collect personal information including sensitive health information. WiFi Bluetooth and cell phone networks on any of these devices could be used as attack vectors and sensors might be remotely activated after a successful breach.  124  The increasing number of home automation devices such as the Nest thermostat are also potential targets.  124  Healthcare  edit  Today many healthcare providers and health insurance companies use the internet to provide enhanced products and services. Examples are the use of telehealth to potentially offer better quality and access to healthcare or fitness trackers to lower insurance premiums. Hospitals increasingly use interconnected devices within their networks. This is called Internet of Things IoT .  125  Connecting multiple devices within the hospital introduces various benefits such as automated detection of patient parameters electronic dose adjustments and decision support for clinicians.  126  However as these devices serve as potential access points to the hospital network security threats increase and hospitals have to introduce adequate security measures which for example comply with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act HIPAA .  127  The health care company Humana partners with WebMD  Oracle Corporation  EDS and Microsoft to enable its members to access their health care records as well as to provide an overview of health care plans.  128  Patient records are increasingly being placed on secure inhouse networks alleviating the need for extra storage space.  129  Large corporations  edit  Large corporations are common targets. In many cases attacks are aimed at financial gain through identity theft and involve data breaches . Examples include the loss of millions of clients credit card and financial details by Home Depot   130  Staples   131  Target Corporation   132  and Equifax .  133  Medical records have been targeted in general identify theft health insurance fraud and impersonating patients to obtain prescription drugs for recreational purposes or resale.  134  Although cyber threats continue to increase 62 of all organizations did not increase security training for their business in 2015.  135  Not all attacks are financially motivated however security firm HBGary Federal had a serious series of attacks in 2011 from hacktivist group Anonymous in retaliation for the firms CEO claiming to have infiltrated their group  136   137  and Sony Pictures was hacked in 2014 with the apparent dual motive of embarrassing the company through data leaks and crippling the company by wiping workstations and servers.  138   139  Automobiles  edit  See also Autonomous car Potential disadvantages  Automated driving system Risks and liabilities  and Automotive hacking Vehicles are increasingly computerized with engine timing cruise control  antilock brakes  seat belt tensioners door locks airbags and advanced driverassistance systems on many models. Additionally connected cars may use WiFi and Bluetooth to communicate with onboard consumer devices and the cell phone network.  140  Selfdriving cars are expected to be even more complex. All of these systems carry some security risks and such issues have gained wide attention.  141   142   143  Simple examples of risk include a malicious compact disc being used as an attack vector  144  and the cars onboard microphones being used for eavesdropping. However if access is gained to a cars internal controller area network  the danger is much greater  140   and in a widely publicized 2015 test hackers remotely carjacked a vehicle from 10 miles away and drove it into a ditch.  145   146  Manufacturers are reacting in numerous ways with Tesla in 2016 pushing out some security fixes over the air into its cars computer systems.  147  In the area of autonomous vehicles in September 2016 the United States Department of Transportation announced some initial safety standards and called for states to come up with uniform policies.  148   149   150  Additionally eDrivers licenses are being developed using the same technology. For example Mexicos licensing authority ICV has used a smart card platform to issue the first eDrivers licenses to the city of Monterrey  in the state of Nuevo Len .  151  Shipping  edit  Shipping companies  152  have adopted RFID Radio Frequency Identification technology as an efficient digitally secure tracking device . Unlike a barcode  RFID can be read up to 20 feet away. RFID is used by FedEx  153  and UPS .  154  Government  edit  Government and military computer systems are commonly attacked by activists  155   156   157  and foreign powers.  158   159   160   161  Local and regional government infrastructure such as traffic light controls police and intelligence agency communications personnel records  as well as student records.  162  The FBI  CIA  and Pentagon  all utilize secure controlled access technology for any of their buildings. However the use of this form of technology is spreading into the entrepreneurial world. More and more companies are taking advantage of the development of digitally secure controlled access technology. GEs ACUVision for example offers a single panel platform for access control alarm monitoring and digital recording.  163  Internet of things and physical vulnerabilities  edit  The Internet of things IoT is the network of physical objects such as devices vehicles and buildings that are embedded with electronics  software  sensors  and network connectivity that enables them to collect and exchange data.  164  Concerns have been raised that this is being developed without appropriate consideration of the security challenges involved.  165   166  While the IoT creates opportunities for more direct integration of the physical world into computerbased systems  167   168  it also provides opportunities for misuse. In particular as the Internet of Things spreads widely cyberattacks are likely to become an increasingly physical rather than simply virtual threat.  169  If a front doors lock is connected to the Internet and can be lockedunlocked from a phone then a criminal could enter the home at the press of a button from a stolen or hacked phone. People could stand to lose much more than their credit card numbers in a world controlled by IoTenabled devices. Thieves have also used electronic means to circumvent nonInternetconnected hotel door locks.  170  An attack aimed at physical infrastructure or human lives is often called a cyberkinetic attack. As IoT devices and appliances become more widespread the prevalence and potential damage of cyberkinetic attacks can increase substantially. Medical systems  edit  See also Medical device hijack and Medical data breach Medical devices have either been successfully attacked or had potentially deadly vulnerabilities demonstrated including both inhospital diagnostic equipment  171  and implanted devices including pacemakers  172  and insulin pumps .  173  There are many reports of hospitals and hospital organizations getting hacked including ransomware attacks  174   175   176   177  Windows XP exploits  178   179  viruses  180   181  and data breaches of sensitive data stored on hospital servers.  182   175   183   184  On 28 December 2016 the US Food and Drug Administration released its recommendations for how medical device manufacturers should maintain the security of Internetconnected devices  but no structure for enforcement.  185   186  Energy sector  edit  In distributed generation systems the risk of a cyber attack is real according to Daily Energy Insider . An attack could cause a loss of power in a large area for a long period of time and such an attack could have just as severe consequences as a natural disaster. The District of Columbia is considering creating a Distributed Energy Resources DER Authority within the city with the goal being for customers to have more insight into their own energy use and giving the local electric utility Pepco  the chance to better estimate energy demand. The D.C. proposal however would allow thirdparty vendors to create numerous points of energy distribution which could potentially create more opportunities for cyber attackers to threaten the electric grid.  187  Telecommunications  edit  Perhaps the most widely known digitally secure telecommunication device is the SIM Subscriber Identity Module card a device that is embedded in most of the worlds cellular devices before any service can be obtained. The SIM card is just the beginning of this digitally secure environment. The Smart Card Web Servers draft standard SCWS defines the interfaces to an HTTP server in a smart card .  188  Tests are being conducted to secure OTA overtheair payment and credit card information from and to a mobile phone. 
Combination SIMDVD devices are being developed through Smart Video Card technology which embeds a DVD compliant optical disc into the card body of a regular SIM card. Other telecommunication developments involving digital security include mobile signatures  which use the embedded SIM card to generate a legally binding electronic signature . Cost and impact of security breaches  edit  Serious financial damage has been caused by security breaches  but because there is no standard model for estimating the cost of an incident the only data available is that which is made public by the organizations involved. Several computer security consulting firms produce estimates of total worldwide losses attributable to virus and worm attacks and to hostile digital acts in general. The 2003 loss estimates by these firms range from 13 billion worms and viruses only to 226 billion for all forms of covert attacks. The reliability of these estimates is often challenged the underlying methodology is basically anecdotal.  189  However reasonable estimates of the financial cost of security breaches can actually help organizations make rational investment decisions. According to the classic GordonLoeb Model analyzing the optimal investment level in information security one can conclude that the amount a firm spends to protect information should generally be only a small fraction of the expected loss i.e. the expected value of the loss resulting from a cyberinformation security breach .  190  Attacker motivation  edit  As with physical security  the motivations for breaches of computer security vary between attackers. Some are thrillseekers or vandals  some are activists others are criminals looking for financial gain. Statesponsored attackers are now common and well resourced but started with amateurs such as Markus Hess who hacked for the KGB  as recounted by Clifford Stoll in The Cuckoos Egg . Attackers motivations can vary for all types of attacks from pleasure to political goals.  15  For example hacktivists may target a company or organization that carries out activities they do not agree with. This would be to create bad publicity for the company by having its website crash. High capability hackers often with larger backing or state sponsorship may attack based on the demands of their financial backers. These attacks are more likely to attempt more serious attack. An example of a more serious attack was the 2015 Ukraine power grid hack  which reportedly utilised the spearphising destruction of files and denialofservice attacks to carry out the full attack.  191   192  Additionally recent attacker motivations can be traced back to extremist organizations seeking to gain political advantage or disrupt social agendas.  193  The growth of the internet mobile technologies and inexpensive computing devices have led to a rise in capabilities but also to the risk to environments that are deemed as vital to operations. All critical targeted environments are susceptible to compromise and this has led to a series of proactive studies on how to migrate the risk by taking into consideration motivations by these types of actors. Several stark differences exist between the hacker motivation and that of nation state actors seeking to attack based on an ideological preference.  194  A key aspect of threat modeling for any system is identifying the motivations behind potential attacks and the individuals or groups likely to carry them out. The level and detail of security measures will differ based on the specific system being protected. For instance a home personal computer a bank and a classified military network each face distinct threats despite using similar underlying technologies.  195  Computer security incident management  edit  Computer security incident management is an organized approach to addressing and managing the aftermath of a computer security incident or compromise with the goal of preventing a breach or thwarting a cyberattack. An incident that is not identified and managed at the time of intrusion typically escalates to a more damaging event such as a data breach or system failure. The intended outcome of a computer security incident response plan is to contain the incident limit damage and assist recovery to business as usual. Responding to compromises quickly can mitigate exploited vulnerabilities restore services and processes and minimize losses.  196  Incident response planning allows an organization to establish a series of best practices to stop an intrusion before it causes damage. Typical incident response plans contain a set of written instructions that outline the organizations response to a cyberattack. Without a documented plan in place an organization may not successfully detect an intrusion or compromise and stakeholders may not understand their roles processes and procedures during an escalation slowing the organizations response and resolution. There are four key components of a computer security incident response plan Preparation Preparing stakeholders on the procedures for handling computer security incidents or compromises Detection and analysis Identifying and investigating suspicious activity to confirm a security incident prioritizing the response based on impact and coordinating notification of the incident Containment eradication and recovery Isolating affected systems to prevent escalation and limit impact pinpointing the genesis of the incident removing malware affected systems and bad actors from the environment and restoring systems and data when a threat no longer remains Post incident activity Post mortem analysis of the incident its root cause and the organizations response with the intent of improving the incident response plan and future response efforts.  197  Notable attacks and breaches  edit  Further information List of cyberattacks and List of data breaches Some illustrative examples of different types of computer security breaches are given below. Robert Morris and the first computer worm  edit  Main article Morris worm In 1988 60000 computers were connected to the Internet and most were mainframes minicomputers and professional workstations. On 2 November 1988 many started to slow down because they were running a malicious code that demanded processor time and that spread itself to other computers  the first internet computer worm .  198  The software was traced back to 23yearold Cornell University graduate student Robert Tappan Morris who said he wanted to count how many machines were connected to the Internet.  198  Rome Laboratory  edit  In 1994 over a hundred intrusions were made by unidentified crackers into the Rome Laboratory  the US Air Forces main command and research facility. Using trojan horses  hackers were able to obtain unrestricted access to Romes networking systems and remove traces of their activities. The intruders were able to obtain classified files such as air tasking order systems data and furthermore able to penetrate connected networks of National Aeronautics and Space Administration s Goddard Space Flight Center WrightPatterson Air Force Base some Defense contractors and other private sector organizations by posing as a trusted Rome center user.  199  TJX customer credit card details  edit  In early 2007 American apparel and home goods company TJX announced that it was the victim of an unauthorized computer systems intrusion  200  and that the hackers had accessed a system that stored data on credit card  debit card  check  and merchandise return transactions.  201  Stuxnet attack  edit  In 2010 the computer worm known as Stuxnet reportedly ruined almost onefifth of Irans nuclear centrifuges .  202  It did so by disrupting industrial programmable logic controllers PLCs in a targeted attack. This is generally believed to have been launched by Israel and the United States to disrupt Irans nuclear program  203   204   205   206   although neither has publicly admitted this. Global surveillance disclosures  edit  Main article Global surveillance disclosures 2013present In early 2013 documents provided by Edward Snowden were published by The Washington Post and The Guardian  207   208  exposing the massive scale of NSA global surveillance. There were also indications that the NSA may have inserted a backdoor in a NIST standard for encryption.  209  This standard was later withdrawn due to widespread criticism.  210  The NSA additionally were revealed to have tapped the links between Google s data centers.  211  Target and Home Depot breaches  edit  A Ukrainian hacker known as Rescator broke into Target Corporation computers in 2013 stealing roughly 40 million credit cards  212  and then Home Depot computers in 2014 stealing between 53 and 56 million credit card numbers.  213  Warnings were delivered at both corporations but ignored physical security breaches using self checkout machines are believed to have played a large role. The malware utilized is absolutely unsophisticated and uninteresting says Jim Walter director of threat intelligence operations at security technology company McAfee  meaning that the heists could have easily been stopped by existing antivirus software had administrators responded to the warnings. The size of the thefts has resulted in major attention from state and Federal United States authorities and the investigation is ongoing. Office of Personnel Management data breach  edit  In April 2015 the Office of Personnel Management discovered it had been hacked more than a year earlier in a data breach resulting in the theft of approximately 21.5million personnel records handled by the office.  214  The Office of Personnel Management hack has been described by federal officials as among the largest breaches of government data in the history of the United States.  215  Data targeted in the breach included personally identifiable information such as Social Security numbers  names dates and places of birth addresses and fingerprints of current and former government employees as well as anyone who had undergone a government background check.  216   217  It is believed the hack was perpetrated by Chinese hackers.  218  Ashley Madison breach  edit  Main article Ashley Madison Data Breach In July 2015 a hacker group is known as The Impact Team successfully breached the extramarital relationship website Ashley Madison created by Avid Life Media. The group claimed that they had taken not only company data but user data as well. After the breach The Impact Team dumped emails from the companys CEO to prove their point and threatened to dump customer data unless the website was taken down permanently.  219  When Avid Life Media did not take the site offline the group released two more compressed files one 9.7GB and the second 20GB. After the second data dump Avid Life Media CEO Noel Biderman resigned but the website remained to function. Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack  edit  Main article Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack In June 2021 the cyber attack took down the largest fuel pipeline in the U.S. and led to shortages across the East Coast.  220  Legal issues and global regulation  edit  International legal issues of cyber attacks are complicated in nature. There is no global base of common rules to judge and eventually punish cybercrimes and cybercriminals  and where security firms or agencies do locate the cybercriminal behind the creation of a particular piece of malware or form of cyber attack  often the local authorities cannot take action due to lack of laws under which to prosecute.  221   222  Proving attribution for cybercrimes and cyberattacks is also a major problem for all law enforcement agencies.  Computer viruses switch from one country to another from one jurisdiction to another  moving around the world using the fact that we dont have the capability to globally police operations like this. So the Internet is as if someone had given free plane tickets to all the online criminals of the world.  221  The use of techniques such as dynamic DNS  fast flux and bullet proof servers add to the difficulty of investigation and enforcement. Role of government  edit  The role of the government is to make regulations to force companies and organizations to protect their systems infrastructure and information from any cyberattacks but also to protect its own national infrastructure such as the national powergrid .  223  The governments regulatory role in cyberspace is complicated. For some cyberspace was seen as a virtual space that was to remain free of government intervention as can be seen in many of todays libertarian blockchain and bitcoin discussions.  224  Many government officials and experts think that the government should do more and that there is a crucial need for improved regulation mainly due to the failure of the private sector to solve efficiently the cybersecurity problem. R. Clarke said during a panel discussion at the RSA Security Conference in San Francisco  he believes that the industry only responds when you threaten regulation. If the industry doesnt respond to the threat you have to follow through.  225  On the other hand executives from the private sector agree that improvements are necessary but think that government intervention would affect their ability to innovate efficiently. Daniel R. McCarthy analyzed this publicprivate partnership in cybersecurity and reflected on the role of cybersecurity in the broader constitution of political order.  226  On 22 May 2020 the UN Security Council held its second ever informal meeting on cybersecurity to focus on cyber challenges to international peace . According to UN SecretaryGeneral Antnio Guterres  new technologies are too often used to violate rights.  227  International actions  edit  Many different teams and organizations exist including The Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams FIRST is the global association of CSIRTs.  228  The USCERT  ATT  Apple  Cisco  McAfee  Microsoft are all members of this international team.  229  The Council of Europe helps protect societies worldwide from the threat of cybercrime through the Convention on Cybercrime.  230  The purpose of the Messaging AntiAbuse Working Group MAAWG is to bring the messaging industry together to work collaboratively and to successfully address the various forms of messaging abuse such as spam viruses denialofservice attacks and other messaging exploitations.  231  France Telecom  Facebook  ATT  Apple  Cisco  Sprint are some of the members of the MAAWG.  232  ENISA The European Network and Information Security Agency ENISA is an agency of the European Union with the objective to improve network and information security in the European Union . Europe  edit  On 14 April 2016 the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union adopted the General Data Protection Regulation GDPR. The GDPR which came into force on 25 May 2018 grants individuals within the European Union EU and the European Economic Area EEA the right to the protection of personal data . The regulation requires that any entity that processes personal data incorporate data protection by design and by default. It also requires that certain organizations appoint a Data Protection Officer DPO. National actions  edit  Computer emergency response teams  edit  Main article Computer emergency response team Most countries have their own computer emergency response team to protect network security. Canada  edit  Since 2010 Canada has had a cybersecurity strategy.  233   234  This functions as a counterpart document to the National Strategy and Action Plan for Critical Infrastructure.  235  The strategy has three main pillars securing government systems securing vital private cyber systems and helping Canadians to be secure online.  234   235  There is also a Cyber Incident Management Framework to provide a coordinated response in the event of a cyber incident.  236   237  The Canadian Cyber Incident Response Centre CCIRC is responsible for mitigating and responding to threats to Canadas critical infrastructure and cyber systems. It provides support to mitigate cyber threats technical support to respond  recover from targeted cyber attacks and provides online tools for members of Canadas critical infrastructure sectors.  238  It posts regular cybersecurity bulletins  239   operates an online reporting tool where individuals and organizations can report a cyber incident.  240  To inform the general public on how to protect themselves online Public Safety Canada has partnered with STOP.THINK.CONNECT a coalition of nonprofit private sector and government organizations  241  and launched the Cyber Security Cooperation Program.  242   243  They also run the GetCyberSafe portal for Canadian citizens and Cyber Security Awareness Month during October.  244  Public Safety Canada aims to begin an evaluation of Canadas cybersecurity strategy in early 2015.  235  Australia  edit  Australian federal government announced an 18.2 million investment to fortify the cybersecurity resilience of small and medium enterprises SMEs and enhance their capabilities in responding to cyber threats. This financial backing is an integral component of the soontobeunveiled 20232030 Australian Cyber Security Strategy  slated for release within the current week. A substantial allocation of 7.2 million is earmarked for the establishment of a voluntary cyber health check program facilitating businesses in conducting a comprehensive and tailored selfassessment of their cybersecurity upskill. This avantgarde health assessment serves as a diagnostic tool enabling enterprises to ascertain the robustness of Australias cyber security regulations . Furthermore it affords them access to a repository of educational resources and materials fostering the acquisition of skills necessary for an elevated cybersecurity posture. This groundbreaking initiative was jointly disclosed by Minister for Cyber Security Clare ONeil and Minister for Small Business Julie Collins .  245  India  edit  Some provisions for cybersecurity have been incorporated into rules framed under the Information Technology Act 2000.  246  The National Cyber Security Policy 2013 is a policy framework by the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology MeitY which aims to protect the public and private infrastructure from cyberattacks and safeguard information such as personal information of web users financial and banking information and sovereign data. CERT In is the nodal agency which monitors the cyber threats in the country. The post of National Cyber Security Coordinator has also been created in the Prime Ministers Office PMO . The Indian Companies Act 2013 has also introduced cyber law and cybersecurity obligations on the part of Indian directors. Some provisions for cybersecurity have been incorporated into rules framed under the Information Technology Act 2000 Update in 2013.  247  South Korea  edit  Following cyberattacks in the first half of 2013 when the government news media television stations and bank websites were compromised the national government committed to the training of 5000 new cybersecurity experts by 2017. The South Korean government blamed its northern counterpart for these attacks as well as incidents that occurred in 2009 2011  248  and 2012 but Pyongyang denies the accusations.  249  United States  edit  Cyber Plan  edit  The United States has its first fully formed cyber plan in 15 years as a result of the release of this National Cyber plan.  250  In this policy the US says it will Protect the country by keeping networks systems functions and data safe Promote American wealth by building a strong digital economy and encouraging strong domestic innovation Peace and safety should be kept by making it easier for the US to stop people from using computer tools for bad things working with friends and partners to do this and increase the United States impact around the world to support the main ideas behind an open safe reliable and compatible Internet.  251  The new U.S. cyber strategy  252  seeks to allay some of those concerns by promoting responsible behavior in cyberspace  urging nations to adhere to a set of norms both through international law and voluntary standards. It also calls for specific measures to harden U.S. government networks from attacks like the June 2015 intrusion into the U.S. Office of Personnel Management OPM which compromised the records of about 4.2 million current and former government employees. And the strategy calls for the U.S. to continue to name and shame bad cyber actors calling them out publicly for attacks when possible along with the use of economic sanctions and diplomatic pressure.  253  Legislation  edit  The 1986 18U.S.C. 1030  the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act is the key legislation. It prohibits unauthorized access or damage of protected computers as defined in 18 U.S.C. 1030e2 . Although various other measures have been proposed  254   255   none have succeeded. In 2013 executive order 13636 Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity was signed which prompted the creation of the NIST Cybersecurity Framework . In response to the Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack  256  President Joe Biden signed Executive Order 14028  257  on May 12 2021 to increase software security standards for sales to the government tighten detection and security on existing systems improve information sharing and training establish a Cyber Safety Review Board and improve incident response. Standardized government testing services  edit  The General Services Administration GSA has  when  standardized the penetration test service as a prevetted support service to rapidly address potential vulnerabilities and stop adversaries before they impact US federal state and local governments. These services are commonly referred to as Highly Adaptive Cybersecurity Services HACS. Further information Penetration test Standardized government penetration test services Agencies  edit  The Department of Homeland Security has a dedicated division responsible for the response system risk management program and requirements for cybersecurity in the United States called the National Cyber Security Division .  258   259  The division is home to USCERT operations and the National Cyber Alert System.  259  The National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center brings together government organizations responsible for protecting computer networks and networked infrastructure.  260  The third priority of the FBI is to Protect the United States against cyberbased attacks and hightechnology crimes  261  and they along with the National White Collar Crime Center NW3C and the Bureau of Justice Assistance BJA are part of the multiagency task force The Internet Crime Complaint Center  also known as IC3.  262  In addition to its own specific duties the FBI participates alongside nonprofit organizations such as InfraGard .  263   264  The Computer Crime and Intellectual Property Section CCIPS operates in the United States Department of Justice Criminal Division . The CCIPS is in charge of investigating computer crime and intellectual property crime and is specialized in the search and seizure of digital evidence in computers and networks .  265  In 2017 CCIPS published A Framework for a Vulnerability Disclosure Program for Online Systems to help organizations clearly describe authorized vulnerability disclosure and discovery conduct thereby substantially reducing the likelihood that such described activities will result in a civil or criminal violation of law under the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act 18 U.S.C.  1030.  266  The United States Cyber Command  also known as USCYBERCOM has the mission to direct synchronize and coordinate cyberspace planning and operations to defend and advance national interests in collaboration with domestic and international partners.  267  It has no role in the protection of civilian networks.  268   269  The U.S. Federal Communications Commission s role in cybersecurity is to strengthen the protection of critical communications infrastructure to assist in maintaining the reliability of networks during disasters to aid in swift recovery after and to ensure that first responders have access to effective communications services.  270  The Food and Drug Administration has issued guidance for medical devices  271  and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration  272  is concerned with automotive cybersecurity. After being criticized by the Government Accountability Office   273  and following successful attacks on airports and claimed attacks on airplanes the Federal Aviation Administration has devoted funding to securing systems on board the planes of private manufacturers and the Aircraft Communications Addressing and Reporting System .  274  Concerns have also been raised about the future Next Generation Air Transportation System .  275  The US Department of Defense DoD issued DoD Directive 8570 in 2004 supplemented by DoD Directive 8140 requiring all DoD employees and all DoD contract personnel involved in information assurance roles and activities to earn and maintain various industry Information Technology IT certifications in an effort to ensure that all DoD personnel involved in network infrastructure defense have minimum levels of IT industry recognized knowledge skills and abilities KSA. Andersson and Reimers 2019 report these certifications range from CompTIAs A and Security through the ICS2.orgs CISSP etc.  276  Computer emergency readiness team  edit  Computer emergency response team is a name given to expert groups that handle computer security incidents. In the US two distinct organizations exist although they do work closely together. USCERT  part of the National Cyber Security Division of the United States Department of Homeland Security .  277  CERTCC  created by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency DARPA and run by the Software Engineering Institute SEI. U.S. NRC 10 CFR 73.54 Cybersecurity  edit  In the context of U.S. nuclear power plants  the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission NRC outlines cybersecurity requirements under 10 CFR Part 73  specifically in 73.54.  278  NEI 0809 Cybersecurity Plan for Nuclear Power Plants  edit  The Nuclear Energy Institute s NEI 0809 document Cyber Security Plan for Nuclear Power Reactors   279  outlines a comprehensive framework for cybersecurity in the nuclear power industry . Drafted with input from the U.S. NRC  this guideline is instrumental in aiding licensees to comply with the Code of Federal Regulations CFR  which mandates robust protection of digital computers and equipment and communications systems at nuclear power plants against cyber threats.  280  Modern warfare  edit  Main article Cyberwarfare There is growing concern that cyberspace will become the next theater of warfare. As Mark Clayton from The Christian Science Monitor wrote in a 2015 article titled The New Cyber Arms Race In the future wars will not just be fought by soldiers with guns or with planes that drop bombs. They will also be fought with the click of a mouse a half a world away that unleashes carefully weaponized computer programs that disrupt or destroy critical industries like utilities transportation communications and energy. Such attacks could also disable military networks that control the movement of troops the path of jet fighters the command and control of warships.  281  This has led to new terms such as cyberwarfare and cyberterrorism . The United States Cyber Command was created in 2009  282  and many other countries have similar forces . There are a few critical voices that question whether cybersecurity is as significant a threat as it is made out to be.  283   284   285  Careers  edit  Cybersecurity is a fastgrowing field of IT concerned with reducing organizations risk of hack or data breaches.  286  According to research from the Enterprise Strategy Group 46 of organizations say that they have a problematic shortage of cybersecurity skills in 2016 up from 28 in 2015.  287  Commercial government and nongovernmental organizations all employ cybersecurity professionals. The fastest increases in demand for cybersecurity workers are in industries managing increasing volumes of consumer data such as finance health care and retail.  288  However the use of the term cybersecurity is more prevalent in government job descriptions.  289  Typical cybersecurity job titles and descriptions include  290  Security analyst  edit  Analyzes and assesses vulnerabilities in the infrastructure software hardware networks investigates using available tools and countermeasures to remedy the detected vulnerabilities and recommends solutions and best practices. Analyzes and assesses damage to the datainfrastructure as a result of security incidents examines available recovery tools and processes and recommends solutions. Tests for compliance with security policies and procedures. May assist in the creation implementation or management of security solutions. Security engineer  edit  Performs security monitoring security and datalogs analysis and forensic analysis to detect security incidents and mount the incident response. Investigates and utilizes new technologies and processes to enhance security capabilities and implement improvements. May also review code or perform other security engineering methodologies. Security architect  edit  Designs a security system or major components of a security system and may head a security design team building a new security system.  291  Chief Information Security Officer CISO  edit  A highlevel management position responsible for the entire information security divisionstaff. The position may include handson technical work.  292  Chief Security Officer CSO  edit  A highlevel management position responsible for the entire security divisionstaff. A newer position is now deemed needed as security risks grow. Data Protection Officer DPO  edit  A DPO is tasked with monitoring compliance with data protection laws such as GDPR  data protection policies awarenessraising training and audits.  293  Security ConsultantSpecialistIntelligence  edit  Broad titles that encompass any one or all of the other roles or titles tasked with protecting computers networks software data or information systems against viruses worms spyware malware intrusion detection unauthorized access denialofservice attacks and an everincreasing list of attacks by hackers acting as individuals or as part of organized crime or foreign governments. Student programs are also available for people interested in beginning a career in cybersecurity.  294   295  Meanwhile a flexible and effective option for information security professionals of all experience levels to keep studying is online security training including webcasts.  296   297  A wide range of certified courses are also available.  298  In the United Kingdom a nationwide set of cybersecurity forums known as the U.K Cyber Security Forum  were established supported by the Governments cybersecurity strategy  299  in order to encourage startups and innovation and to address the skills gap  300  identified by the U.K Government . In Singapore the Cyber Security Agency has issued a Singapore Operational Technology OT Cybersecurity Competency Framework OTCCF. The framework defines emerging cybersecurity roles in Operational Technology. The OTCCF was endorsed by the Infocomm Media Development Authority IMDA. It outlines the different OT cybersecurity job positions as well as the technical skills and core competencies necessary. It also depicts the many career paths available including vertical and lateral advancement opportunities.  301  Terminology  edit  The following terms used with regards to computer security are explained below Access authorization restricts access to a computer to a group of users through the use of authentication systems. These systems can protect either the whole computer such as through an interactive login screen or individual services such as a FTP server. There are many methods for identifying and authenticating users such as passwords  identification cards  smart cards  and biometric systems. Antivirus software consists of computer programs that attempt to identify thwart and eliminate computer viruses and other malicious software  malware . Applications are executable code  so general corporate practice is to restrict or block users the power to install them to install them only when there is a demonstrated need e.g. software needed to perform assignments to install only those which are known to be reputable preferably with access to the computer code used to create the application and to reduce the attack surface by installing as few as possible. They are typically run with least privilege  with a robust process in place to identify test and install any released security patches or updates for them. For example programs can be installed into an individual users account which limits the programs potential access as well as being a means control which users have specific exceptions to policy.  In Linux  FreeBSD  OpenBSD  and other Unix like operating systems there is an option to further restrict an application using chroot or other means of restricting the application to its own sandbox .  For example. Linux provides namespaces  and Cgroups to further restrict the access of an application to system resources. Generalized security frameworks such as SELinux or AppArmor help administrators control access. Java and other languages which compile to Java byte code and run in the Java virtual machine can have their access to other applications controlled at the virtual machine level. Some software can be run in software containers which can even provide their own set of system libraries limiting the softwares or anyone controlling it access to the servers versions of the libraries. Authentication techniques can be used to ensure that communication endpoints are who they say they are. Automated theorem proving and other verification tools can be used to enable critical algorithms and code used in secure systems to be mathematically proven to meet their specifications. Backups are one or more copies kept of important computer files. Typically multiple copies will be kept at different locations so that if a copy is stolen or damaged other copies will still exist. Capability and access control list techniques can be used to ensure privilege separation and mandatory access control. Capabilities vs. ACLs discusses their use. Chain of trust techniques can be used to attempt to ensure that all software loaded has been certified as authentic by the systems designers. Confidentiality is the nondisclosure of information except to another authorized person.  302  Cryptographic techniques can be used to defend data in transit between systems reducing the probability that the data exchange between systems can be intercepted or modified. Cyber attribution   is an attribution of cybercrime  i.e. finding who perpetrated a cyberattack . Cyberwarfare is an Internetbased conflict that involves politically motivated attacks on information and information systems. Such attacks can for example disable official websites and networks disrupt or disable essential services steal or alter classified data and cripple financial systems. Data integrity is the accuracy and consistency of stored data indicated by an absence of any alteration in data between two updates of a data record.  303  Cryptographic techniques involve transforming information scrambling it so it becomes unreadable during transmission. The intended recipient can unscramble the message ideally eavesdroppers cannot. Encryption is used to protect the confidentiality of a message. Cryptographically secure ciphers are designed to make any practical attempt of breaking them infeasible. Symmetrickey ciphers are suitable for bulk encryption using shared keys  and publickey encryption using digital certificates can provide a practical solution for the problem of securely communicating when no key is shared in advance. Endpoint security software aids networks in preventing malware infection and data theft at network entry points made vulnerable by the prevalence of potentially infected devices such as laptops mobile devices and USB drives.  304  Firewalls serve as a gatekeeper system between networks allowing only traffic that matches defined rules. They often include detailed logging  and may include intrusion detection and intrusion prevention features. They are nearuniversal between company local area networks and the Internet but can also be used internally to impose traffic rules between networks if network segmentation is configured. A hacker is someone who seeks to breach defenses and exploit weaknesses in a computer system or network. Honey pots are computers that are intentionally left vulnerable to attack by crackers. They can be used to catch crackers and to identify their techniques. Intrusiondetection systems are devices or software applications that monitor networks or systems for malicious activity or policy violations. A microkernel is an approach to operating system design which has only the nearminimum amount of code running at the most privileged level  and runs other elements of the operating system such as device drivers protocol stacks and file systems in the safer less privileged user space . Pinging . The standard ping application can be used to test if an IP address is in use. If it is attackers may then try a port scan to detect which services are exposed. A port scan is used to probe an IP address for open ports to identify accessible network services and applications. A key logger is spyware that silently captures and stores each keystroke that a user types on the computers keyboard. Social engineering is the use of deception to manipulate individuals to breach security. Logic bombs is a type of malware added to a legitimate program that lies dormant until it is triggered by a specific event. A unikernel is a computer program that runs on a minimalistic operating system where a single application is allowed to run as opposed to a general purpose operating system where many applications can run at the same time. This approach to minimizing the attack surface is adopted mostly in cloud environments where software is deployed in virtual machines . Zero trust security means that no one is trusted by default from inside or outside the network and verification is required from everyone trying to gain access to resources on the network. History  edit  Since the Internet s arrival and with the digital transformation initiated in recent years the notion of cybersecurity has become a familiar subject in both our professional and personal lives. Cybersecurity and cyber threats have been consistently present for the last 60 years of technological change. In the 1970s and 1980s computer security was mainly limited to academia until the conception of the Internet where with increased connectivity computer viruses and network intrusions began to take off. After the spread of viruses in the 1990s the 2000s marked the institutionalization of organized attacks such as distributed denial of service .  305  This led to the formalization of cybersecurity as a professional discipline.  306  The April 1967 session organized by Willis Ware at the Spring Joint Computer Conference  and the later publication of the Ware Report  were foundational moments in the history of the field of computer security.  307  Wares work straddled the intersection of material cultural political and social concerns.  307  A 1977 NIST publication  308  introduced the CIA triad of confidentiality integrity and availability as a clear and simple way to describe key security goals.  309  While still relevant many more elaborate frameworks have since been proposed.  310   311  However in the 1970s and 1980s there were no grave computer threats because computers and the internet were still developing and security threats were easily identifiable. More often threats came from malicious insiders who gained unauthorized access to sensitive documents and files. Although malware and network breaches existed during the early years they did not use them for financial gain. By the second half of the 1970s established computer firms like IBM started offering commercial access control systems and computer security software products.  312  One of the earliest examples of an attack on a computer network was the computer worm Creeper written by Bob Thomas at BBN  which propagated through the ARPANET in 1971.  313  The program was purely experimental in nature and carried no malicious payload. A later program Reaper  was created by Ray Tomlinson in 1972 and used to destroy Creeper.  citation needed  Between September 1986 and June 1987 a group of German hackers performed the first documented case of cyber espionage.  314  The group hacked into American defense contractors universities and military base networks and sold gathered information to the Soviet KGB. The group was led by Markus Hess  who was arrested on 29 June 1987. He was convicted of espionage along with two coconspirators on 15 Feb 1990. In 1988 one of the first computer worms called the Morris worm  was distributed via the Internet. It gained significant mainstream media attention.  315  In 1993 Netscape started developing the protocol SSL  shortly after the National Center for Supercomputing Applications NCSA launched Mosaic 1.0 the first web browser in 1993.  citation needed   316  Netscape had SSL version 1.0 ready in 1994 but it was never released to the public due to many serious security vulnerabilities. These weaknesses included replay attacks and a vulnerability that allowed hackers to alter unencrypted communications sent by users. However in February 1995 Netscape launched Version 2.0.  317  The National Security Agency NSA is responsible for the protection of U.S. information systems and also for collecting foreign intelligence.  318  The agency analyzes commonly used software and system configurations to find security flaws which it can use for offensive purposes against competitors of the United States.  319  NSA contractors created and sold clickandshoot attack tools to US agencies and close allies but eventually the tools made their way to foreign adversaries.  320  In 2016 NSAs own hacking tools were hacked and they have been used by Russia and North Korea.  citation needed  NSAs employees and contractors have been recruited at high salaries by adversaries anxious to compete in cyberwarfare .  citation needed  In 2007 the United States and Israel began exploiting security flaws in the Microsoft Windows operating system to attack and damage equipment used in Iran to refine nuclear materials. Iran responded by heavily investing in their own cyberwarfare capability which it began using against the United States.  319  Notable scholars  edit  Ross J. Anderson Annie Anton Adam Back Daniel J. Bernstein Matt Blaze Stefan Brands L. Jean Camp Lorrie Cranor Dorothy E. Denning Peter J. Denning Cynthia Dwork Chuck Easttom Deborah Estrin Joan Feigenbaum Ian Goldberg Shafi Goldwasser Lawrence A. Gordon Peter Gutmann Paul Kocher Monica S. Lam Butler Lampson Brian LaMacchia Susan Landau Carl Landwehr Kevin Mitnick Peter G. Neumann Susan Nycum Paul C. van Oorschot Roger R. Schell Bruce Schneier Dawn Song Gene Spafford Salvatore J. Stolfo Willis Ware Moti Yung See also  edit  Attack tree  Conceptual diagrams showing how an asset or target might be attacked Bicycle attack  Method of discovering password length CAPTCHA  Test to determine whether a user is human Center for Internet Security  Nonprofit organization focused on cybersecurity Cloud computing security  Methods used to protect cloud based assets Comparison of antivirus software Content Disarm  Reconstruction  Policybased removal of  components Content Security Policy  Computer security standard to prevent crosssite scripting and related attacks Countermeasure computer  Process to reduce a security threat Cyber insurance  Information technology risk insurance Cyber selfdefense  Protection of computer systems from information disclosure theft or damage Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Cyberbiosecurity  Emerging field of computer security Cybersecurity information technology list Dancing pigs  Users disregard for IT security Data security  Protection of digital data Defense strategy computing  Concept to reduce computer security risks Fault tolerance  Resilience of systems to component failures or errors Hardware security  Security architecture implemented in hardware Humancomputer interaction security  Academic discipline studying the relationship between computer systems and their users Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Identity management  Technical and Policy systems to give users appropriate access Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Identitybased security  Access control by authenticated ID Information security awareness  part of information security that focuses on raising consciousness regarding potential risks of the rapidly evolving forms of information and the accompanying threats Pages displaying wikidata descriptions as a fallback Internet privacy  Right or mandate of personal privacy concerning the internet Internet safety  Being aware of safety and security risks on the Internet Internet security  Branch of computer security IT risk  Any risk related to information technology IT security standards  Technology standards and techniques Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Cyber kill chain  Process of carrying out a cyberattack List of computer security certifications List of cyber warfare forces Open security  Open source approach to computer security Outline of computer security  Overview of and topical guide to computer security OWASP  Computer security organization Physical information security  Common ground of physical and information security Privacy software  Layer to protect users privacy Security engineering  Process of incorporating security controls into an information system Security through obscurity  Reliance on design or implementation secrecy for security Softwaredefined perimeter  Method of enhancing computer security References  edit   Schatz Daniel Bashroush Rabih Wall Julie 2017. Towards a More Representative Definition of Cyber Security . Journal of Digital Forensics Security and Law . 12 2. ISSN 15587215 .  Computer security at the Encyclopdia Britannica  Tate Nick 7 May 2013. Reliance spells end of road for ICT amateurs . The Australian .  Kianpour Mazaher Kowalski Stewart verby Harald 2021. Systematically Understanding Cybersecurity Economics A Survey . Sustainability . 13 24 13677. doi  10.3390su132413677 . hdl  112502978306 . ISSN 20711050 .  Stevens Tim 11 June 2018. Global Cybersecurity New Directions in Theory and Methods PDF . Politics and Governance . 6 2 1 4. doi  10.17645pag.v6i2.1569 . Archived PDF from the original on 4 September 2019.  About the CVE Program . www.cve.org . Retrieved 12 April 2023 .  Zlatanov Nikola 3 December 2015. Computer Security and Mobile Security Challenges . Tech Security Conference At San Francisco CA.  Ghidra . nsa.gov . 1 August 2018. Archived from the original on 15 August 2020 . Retrieved 17 August 2020 .  Larabel Michael 28 December 2017. Syzbot Google Continuously Fuzzing The Linux Kernel . www.phoronix.com . Retrieved 25 March 2021 .  a b c Cyber attacks on SMBs Current Stats and How to Prevent Them . crowdstrike.com . Retrieved 30 November 2023 .  a b Cyber security breaches survey 2023 . GOV.UK . Retrieved 30 November 2023 .  a b How cyber attacks work . www.ncsc.gov.uk . Retrieved 30 November 2023 .  What is a backdoor attack Definition and prevention  NordVPN . nordvpn.com . 30 November 2023 . Retrieved 3 January 2024 .  a b What is a backdoor attack . McAfee . 4 December 2023 . Retrieved 4 December 2023 .  a b c Denial of Service DoS guidance . www.ncsc.gov.uk . Retrieved 4 December 2023 .  Computer Security . www.interelectronix.com . Retrieved 30 November 2023 .  a b What Is a DMA Attack Analysis  Mitigation . Kroll . Retrieved 4 December 2023 .  a b What Are Eavesdropping Attacks . Fortinet . Retrieved 5 December 2023 .  York Dan 1 January 2010 York Dan ed. Chapter 3  Eavesdropping and Modification  Seven Deadliest Unified Communications Attacks  Boston Syngress pp. 41 69 ISBN 9781597495479  retrieved 5 December 2023  What Are Eavesdropping Attacks  How To Prevent Them . Verizon Enterprise . Retrieved 5 December 2023 .  a b c d e f What is Malware  IBM . www.ibm.com . 14 April 2022 . Retrieved 6 December 2023 .  Bendovschi Andreea 2015. CyberAttacks  Trends Patterns and Security Countermeasures . Procedia Economics and Finance . 28  24 31. doi  10.1016S2212567115010771 .  What is malware . McAfee . Retrieved 30 November 2023 .  a b What is a maninthemiddle attack and how can I protect my organization . verizon.com .  MultiVector Attacks Demand MultiVector Protection . MSSP Alert . 24 July 2017.  Millman Renee 15 December 2017. New polymorphic malware evades threequarters of AV scanners . SC Magazine UK .  a b c Tounsi Wiem 15 May 2019 Tounsi Wiem ed. What is Cyber Threat Intelligence and How is it Evolving  CyberVigilance and Digital Trust 1ed. Wiley pp. 1 49 doi  10.10029781119618393.ch1  ISBN 9781786304483  S2CID 187294508  retrieved 6 December 2023  Identifying Phishing Attempts . Case. Archived from the original on 13 September 2015 . Retrieved 4 July 2016 .  Protect yourself from phishing  Microsoft Support . support.microsoft.com . Retrieved 6 December 2023 .  Lazarus Ari 23 February 2018. Phishers send fake invoices . Consumer Information . Retrieved 17 February 2020 .  Email Security . Trellix . 17 May 2022. Archived from the original on 22 May 2022 . Retrieved 24 October 2022 .  a b c d What is Privilege Escalation  CrowdStrike . crowdstrike.com . Retrieved 7 December 2023 .  Spence Aaron Bangay Shaun June 2022. Security beyond cybersecurity sidechannel attacks against noncyber systems and their countermeasures . International Journal of Information Security . 21 3 437 453. doi  10.1007s10207021005636 . ISSN 16155262 .  Arcos Sergio. Social Engineering PDF . upc.edu . Archived PDF from the original on 3 December 2013 . Retrieved 16 April 2019 .  Scannell Kara 24 February 2016. CEO email scam costs companies 2bn . Financial Times . No.25 February 2016. Archived from the original on 23 June 2016 . Retrieved 7 May 2016 .  Bucks leak tax info of players employees as result of email scam . Associated Press. 20 May 2016. Archived from the original on 20 May 2016 . Retrieved 20 May 2016 .  What is Spoofing  Definition from Techopedia . techopedia.com . Archived from the original on 30 June 2016 . Retrieved 16 January 2022 .  Butterfield Andrew Ngondi Gerard Ekembe eds. 21 January 2016. spoofing . A Dictionary of Computer Science . Oxford University Press. doi  10.1093acref9780199688975.001.0001 . ISBN 9780199688975 . Retrieved 8 October 2017 .  Marcel Sbastien Nixon Mark Li Stan eds. 2014. Handbook of Biometric AntiSpoofing Trusted Biometrics under Spoofing Attacks . Advances in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. London Springer. doi  10.10079781447165248 . ISBN 9781447165248 . ISSN 21916594 . LCCN 2014942635 . S2CID 27594864 .  80 to 0 in Under 5 Seconds Falsifying a Medical Patients Vitals . www.trellix.com . Retrieved 9 February 2023 .  Gallagher Sean 14 May 2014. Photos of an NSA upgrade factory show Cisco router getting implant . Ars Technica . Archived from the original on 4 August 2014 . Retrieved 3 August 2014 .  a b Intelligence Microsoft Threat 11 November 2021. HTML smuggling surges Highly evasive loader technique increasingly used in banking malware targeted attacks . Microsoft Security Blog . Retrieved 7 December 2023 .  Obfuscated Files or Information HTML Smuggling Subtechnique T1027.006  Enterprise  MITRE ATTCK . attack.mitre.org . Retrieved 22 February 2023 .  Lim Joo S. Chang Shanton Maynard Sean Ahmad Atif 2009. Exploring the Relationship between Organizational Culture and Information Security Culture . Proceedings of the 7th Australian Information Security Management Conference . Perth. Security Research Institute SRI Edith Cowan University 1st to 3rd December 2009. doi  10.42257557B4065130DEF .  Reimers Karl Andersson David 2017. Postsecondary Education Network Security the End User Challenge and Evolving Threats . ICERI2017 Proceedings. Vol.1. IATED. pp. 1787 1796. doi  10.21125iceri.2017.0554 . ISBN 9788469769577 . ISSN 23401095 .  Verizon Data Breach Investigations Report 2020 PDF . verizon.com Report. Archived PDF from the original on 19 May 2020 . Retrieved 17 September 2021 .  a b c Schlienger Thomas Teufel Stephanie 2003. Information security culturefrom analysis to change. South African Computer Journal . 31  46 52. hdl  10520EJC27949 .  Internet Security Glossary . doi  10.17487RFC2828 . RFC 2828 .  CNSS Instruction No. 4009 PDF . 26 April 2010. Archived from the original PDF on 27 February 2012.  InfosecToday Glossary PDF . Archived PDF from the original on 20 November 2014.  Cyber security design principles . www.ncsc.gov.uk . Retrieved 11 December 2023 .  a b How the NCSC thinks about security architecture . www.ncsc.gov.uk . Retrieved 18 December 2023 .  Secure System Architecture and Design . UK Cyber Security Council . 2024 . Retrieved 4 January 2024 .  security architecture  Glossary  CSRC . csrc.nist.gov . Retrieved 18 December 2023 .  Jannsen Cory. Security Architecture . Techopedia . Janalta Interactive Inc. Archived from the original on 3 October 2014 . Retrieved 9 October 2014 .  a b Oppliger Rolf 1 May 1997. Internet security firewalls and beyond . Communications of the ACM . 40 5 92 102. doi  10.1145253769.253802 . ISSN 00010782 .  How to Increase Cybersecurity Awareness . ISACA . Retrieved 25 February 2023 .  Woodie Alex 9 May 2016. Why ONI May Be Our Best Hope for Cyber Security Now . Archived from the original on 20 August 2016 . Retrieved 13 July 2016 .  Walkowski Debbie 9 July 2019. What Is The CIA Triad . F5 Labs . Retrieved 25 February 2020 .  Knowing Value of Data Assets is Crucial to Cybersecurity Risk Management  SecurityWeek.Com . www.securityweek.com . 3 December 2018 . Retrieved 25 February 2020 .  Foreman Park 2009. Vulnerability Management . Boca Raton Fla. Auerbach Publications. p.1. ISBN 9781439801505 .  Johnson A. 2018. CCNA Cybersecurity Operations Companion Guide . Cisco Press. ISBN 9780135166246 .  Calder Alan Williams Geraint 2014. PCI DSS A Pocket Guide 3rded.. IT Governance Limited. ISBN 9781849285544 . network vulnerability scans at least quarterly and after any significant change in the network  Harrison J. 2003. Formal verification at Intel . 18th Annual IEEE Symposium of Logic in Computer Science 2003. Proceedings. pp. 45 54. doi  10.1109LICS.2003.1210044 . ISBN 9780769518848 . S2CID 44585546 .  Umrigar Zerksis D. Pitchumani Vijay 1983. Formal verification of a realtime hardware design . Proceeding DAC 83 Proceedings of the 20th Design Automation Conference. IEEE Press. pp. 221 227. ISBN 9780818600265 .  Abstract Formal Specification of the seL4ARMv6 API PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 21 May 2015 . Retrieved 19 May 2015 .  Baumann Christoph Beckert Bernhard Blasum Holger Bormer Thorsten. Ingredients of Operating System Correctness Lessons Learned in the Formal Verification of PikeOS PDF . Embedded World Conference Nuremberg Germany. Archived from the original PDF on 19 July 2011.  Ganssle Jack. Getting it Right . Archived from the original on 4 May 2013.  Everything you need for a career as a SOC analyst . www.cybersecurityjobsite.com . Retrieved 19 December 2023 .  Turn on 2step verification 2SV . www.ncsc.gov.uk . Retrieved 19 December 2023 .  NCSCs cyber security training for staff now available . www.ncsc.gov.uk . Retrieved 19 December 2023 .  Treglia J. Delia M. 2017. Cyber Security Inoculation . NYS Cyber Security Conference Empire State Plaza Convention Center Albany NY 34 June.  What is a license dongle . www.revenera.com . Retrieved 12 June 2024 .  Tokenbased authentication . SafeNet.com. Archived from the original on 20 March 2014 . Retrieved 20 March 2014 .  Lock and protect your Windows PC . TheWindowsClub.com. 10 February 2010. Archived from the original on 20 March 2014 . Retrieved 20 March 2014 .  Greene James 2012. Intel Trusted Execution Technology White Paper PDF . Intel Corporation. Archived PDF from the original on 11 June 2014 . Retrieved 18 December 2013 .  SafeNet ProtectDrive 8.4 . SCMagazine.com . 4 October 2008. Archived from the original on 20 March 2014 . Retrieved 20 March 2014 .  Secure Hard Drives Lock Down Your Data . PCMag.com. 11 May 2009. Archived from the original on 21 June 2017.  Souppaya Murugiah P. Scarfone Karen 2013. Guidelines for Managing the Security of Mobile Devices in the Enterprise . National Institute of Standards and Technology . Special Publication NIST SP. Gaithersburg MD. doi  10.6028NIST.SP.800124r1 .  Access Control Statistics Trends  Insights . 23 February 2024 . Retrieved 26 April 2024 .  Forget IDs use your phone as credentials . Fox Business Network . 4 November 2013. Archived from the original on 20 March 2014 . Retrieved 20 March 2014 .  Direct memory access protections for Mac computers . Apple . Retrieved 16 November 2022 .  Using IOMMU for DMA Protection in UEFI Firmware PDF . Intel Corporation. Archived PDF from the original on 9 December 2021 . Retrieved 16 November 2022 .  Babaei Armin Schiele Gregor Zohner Michael 26 July 2022. Reconfigurable Security Architecture RESA Based on PUF for FPGABased IoT Devices . Sensors . 22 15 5577. Bibcode  2022Senso..22.5577B . doi  10.3390s22155577 . ISSN 14248220 . PMC 9331300 . PMID 35898079 .  Hassija Vikas Chamola Vinay Gupta Vatsal Jain Sarthak Guizani Nadra 15 April 2021. A Survey on Supply Chain Security Application Areas Security Threats and Solution Architectures . IEEE Internet of Things Journal . 8 8 6222 6246. doi  10.1109JIOT.2020.3025775 . ISSN 23274662 . S2CID 226767829 .  The Most Secure OS What is the Safest OS Available . Tech.co . Retrieved 19 December 2023 .  Sanghavi Alok 21 May 2010. What is formal verification. EE Times_Asia .  Ferraiolo D.F.  Kuhn D.R. October 1992. RoleBased Access Control PDF . 15th National Computer Security Conference  554 563.  Sandhu R Coyne EJ Feinstein HL Youman CE August 1996. RoleBased Access Control Models PDF . IEEE Computer . 29 2 38 47. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.50.7649 . doi  10.11092.485845 . S2CID 1958270 .  Abreu Vilmar Santin Altair O. Viegas Eduardo K. Stihler Maicon 2017. A multidomain role activation model PDF . 2017 IEEE International Conference on Communications ICC. IEEE Press. pp. 1 6. doi  10.1109ICC.2017.7997247 . ISBN 9781467389990 . S2CID 6185138 .  A.C. OConnor  R.J. Loomis 2002. Economic Analysis of RoleBased Access Control PDF . Research Triangle Institute. p.145.  Studies prove once again that users are the weakest link in the security chain . CSO Online . 22 January 2014 . Retrieved 8 October 2018 .  The Role of Human Error in Successful Security Attacks . IBM Security Intelligence . 2 September 2014 . Retrieved 8 October 2018 .  90 of security incidents trace back to PEBKAC and ID10T errors . Computerworld . 15 April 2015 . Retrieved 8 October 2018 .  Protect your online banking with 2FA . NZ Bankers Association . 7 October 2018 . Retrieved 7 September 2019 .  IBM Security Services 2014 Cyber Security Intelligence Index PDF . PcSite . 2014 . Retrieved 9 October 2020 .  Caldwell Tracey 12 February 2013. Risky business why security awareness is crucial for employees . The Guardian . Retrieved 8 October 2018 .  Developing a Security Culture . CPNI  Centre for the Protection of National Infrastructure . Archived from the original on 9 October 2018 . Retrieved 8 October 2018 .  a b Cyber Hygiene  ENISA . Retrieved 27 September 2018 .  a b Kaljulaid Kersti 16 October 2017. President of the Republic at the Aftenpostens Technology Conference . Retrieved 27 September 2018 .  Cyber security breaches survey 2023 . GOV.UK . Retrieved 27 December 2023 .  Kuchler Hannah 27 April 2015. Security execs call on companies to improve cyber hygiene  . Financial Times . Archived from the original on 10 December 2022 . Retrieved 27 September 2018 .  From AI to Russia Heres How Estonias President Is Planning for the Future . Wired . Retrieved 28 September 2018 .  Professor Len Adleman explains how he coined the term computer virus  . WeLiveSecurity . 1 November 2017 . Retrieved 28 September 2018 .  Statement of Dr. Vinton G. Cerf . www.jec.senate.gov . Retrieved 28 September 2018 .  Promoting Good Cyber Hygiene Act of 2017 at Congress.gov  Analysis  The Cybersecurity 202 Agencies struggling with basic cybersecurity despite Trumps pledge to prioritize it . The Washington Post . Retrieved 28 September 2018 .  Protected Voices . Federal Bureau of Investigation . Retrieved 28 September 2018 .  Lin Tom C. W. 3 July 2017. The New Market Manipulation. Emory Law Journal . 66  1253. SSRN 2996896 .  Lin Tom C. W. 2016. Financial Weapons of War. Minnesota Law Review . SSRN 2765010 .  Cole Jeffrey I. Suman Michael Schramm Phoebe van Bel Daniel Lunn B. Maguire Phyllisane Hanson Koran Singh Rajesh Aquino JedrixSean Lebo Harlan 2000. The UCLA Internet report Surveying the digital future PDF . ccp.ucla.edu Report. Archived from the original PDF on 23 April 2003 . Retrieved 15 September 2023 .  Pagliery Jose 18 November 2014. Hackers attacked the U.S. energy grid 79 times this year . CNN Money . Cable News Network. Archived from the original on 18 February 2015 . Retrieved 16 April 2015 .  Neumann P. G. 1997. Computer Security in Aviation Vulnerabilities Threats and Risks . International Conference on Aviation Safety and Security in the 21st Century White House Commission on Safety and Security.  Dillingham Gerald L. 20 September 2001. Aviation security terrorist acts demonstrate urgent need to improve security at the nations airports Report. United States. General Accounting Office.  Air Traffic Control Systems Vulnerabilities Could Make for Unfriendly Skies Black Hat  SecurityWeek.Com . 27 July 2012. Archived from the original on 8 February 2015.  Hacker Says He Can Break into Airplane Systems Using InFlight WiFi . NPR . 4 August 2014. Archived from the original on 8 February 2015 . Retrieved 19 March 2020 .  Finkle Jim 4 August 2014. Hacker says to show passenger jets at risk of cyber attack . Reuters . Archived from the original on 13 October 2015 . Retrieved 21 November 2021 .  Cesar Alan 15 December 2023. Online course bolsters cybersecurity in aviation . Aerogram . Purdue University School of Aeronautics and Astronautics . Retrieved 9 January 2024 .  PanEuropean Network Services PENS  Eurocontrol.int . Archived from the original on 12 December 2016.  Centralised Services NewPENS moves forward  Eurocontrol.int . 17 January 2016. Archived from the original on 19 March 2017.  NextGen Data Communication . FAA. Archived from the original on 13 March 2015 . Retrieved 15 June 2017 .  ePassports  Homeland Security . www.dhs.gov . Retrieved 3 February 2023 .  The Australian ePassport. Australian Government Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade website . Archived from the original on 9 January 2015 . Retrieved 1 May 2023 .  a b Is Your Watch Or Thermostat A Spy Cybersecurity Firms Are On It . NPR . 6 August 2014. Archived from the original on 11 February 2015.  Singh Jagbir 30 June 2024. Challenges with Medical Devices Connected To Hospital Network . International Journal for Research in Applied Science and Engineering Technology . 12 6 735 749. doi  10.22214ijraset.2024.63187 .  Nance Jr John W. Meenan Christopher Nagy Paul G. May 2013. The Future of the Radiology Information System . American Journal of Roentgenology . 200 5 1064 1070. doi  10.2214AJR.12.10326 . ISSN 0361803X .  Rogge G BohnetJoschko S 2024 Cybersecurity All Hands on Deck in a World of Connected Healthcare . Whitepaper. ATLAS Innovation and Digitalization in Healthcare WittenHerdecke University Witten  Humana Inc. 15 November 2000. Humana Web Site Named Best Interactive Site by eHealthcare Strategy  Trends re LOUISVILLE Ky. Nov. 15 PRNewswire . prnewswire.com .  Kruse CB Smith B Vanderlinden H Nealand A 21 July 2017. Security Techniques for the Electronic Health Records . Journal of Medical Systems . 41 8 127. doi  10.1007s1091601707784 . PMC 5522514 . PMID 28733949 .  Backman Melvin 18 September 2014. Home Depot 56 million cards exposed in breach . CNNMoney . Archived from the original on 18 December 2014.  Staples Breach may have affected 1.16 million customers cards . Fortune.com . 19 December 2014. Archived from the original on 21 December 2014 . Retrieved 21 December 2014 .  Target 40 million credit cards compromised . CNN . 19 December 2013. Archived from the original on 1 December 2017 . Retrieved 29 November 2017 .  Cowley Stacy 2 October 2017. 2.5 Million More People Potentially Exposed in Equifax Breach . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 1 December 2017 . Retrieved 29 November 2017 .  Finkle Jim 23 April 2014. Exclusive FBI warns healthcare sector vulnerable to cyber attacks . Reuters . Archived from the original on 4 June 2016 . Retrieved 23 May 2016 .  Seals Tara 6 November 2015. Lack of Employee Security Training Plagues US Businesses . Infosecurity Magazine . Archived from the original on 9 November 2017 . Retrieved 8 November 2017 .  Bright Peter 15 February 2011. Anonymous speaks the inside story of the HBGary hack . Arstechnica.com. Archived from the original on 27 March 2011 . Retrieved 29 March 2011 .  Anderson Nate 9 February 2011. How one man tracked down Anonymous and paid a heavy price . Arstechnica.com. Archived from the original on 29 March 2011 . Retrieved 29 March 2011 .  Palilery Jose 24 December 2014. What caused Sony hack What we know now . CNN Money . Archived from the original on 4 January 2015 . Retrieved 4 January 2015 .  Cook James 16 December 2014. Sony Hackers Have Over 100 Terabytes Of Documents. Only Released 200 Gigabytes So Far . Business Insider . Archived from the original on 17 December 2014 . Retrieved 18 December 2014 .  a b Lee Timothy B. 18 January 2015. The next frontier of hacking your car . Vox . Archived from the original on 17 March 2017.  Tracking  Hacking Security  Privacy Gaps Put American Drivers at Risk PDF Report. 6 February 2015. Archived PDF from the original on 9 November 2016 . Retrieved 4 November 2016 .  Cybersecurity expert It will take a major event for companies to take this issue seriously . AOL.com . 5 January 2017. Archived from the original on 20 January 2017 . Retrieved 22 January 2017 .  The problem with selfdriving cars who controls the code . The Guardian . 23 December 2015. Archived from the original on 16 March 2017 . Retrieved 22 January 2017 .  Checkoway Stephen McCoy Damon Kantor Brian  Anderson Danny Shacham Hovav Savage Stefan  Koscher Karl Czeskis Alexei Roesner Franziska Kohno Tadayoshi 2011. Comprehensive Experimental Analyses of Automotive Attack Surfaces PDF . SEC11 Proceedings of the 20th USENIX conference on Security. Berkeley California US USENIX Association. p.6. Archived PDF from the original on 21 February 2015.  Greenberg Andy 21 July 2015. Hackers Remotely Kill a Jeep on the Highway With Me in It . Wired . Archived from the original on 19 January 2017 . Retrieved 22 January 2017 .  Hackers take control of car drive it into a ditch . The Independent . 22 July 2015. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017 . Retrieved 22 January 2017 .  Tesla fixes software bug that allowed Chinese hackers to control car remotely . The Telegraph . 21 September 2016. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017 . Retrieved 22 January 2017 .  Kang Cecilia 19 September 2016. SelfDriving Cars Gain Powerful Ally The Government . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 14 February 2017 . Retrieved 22 January 2017 .  Federal Automated Vehicles Policy PDF . Archived PDF from the original on 21 January 2017 . Retrieved 22 January 2017 .  Vehicle Cybersecurity . nhtsa.gov . Retrieved 25 November 2022 .  Thales supplies smart driver license to 4 states in Mexico . Thales Group .  4 Companies Using RFID for Supply Chain Management . atlasRFIDstore . Retrieved 3 February 2023 .  The Cutting Edge of RFID Technology and Applications for Manufacturing and Distribution . Supply Chain Market .  Rahman Mohammad Anwar Khadem Mohammad Miftaur Sarder MD. Application of RFID in Supply Chain System . Proceedings of the 2010 International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Operations Management Dhaka Bangladesh January 9  10 2010. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.397.7831 .  Gary McKinnon profile Autistic hacker who started writing computer programs at 14 . The Daily Telegraph . London. 23 January 2009. Archived from the original on 2 June 2010.  Gary McKinnon extradition ruling due by 16 October . BBC News . 6 September 2012. Archived from the original on 6 September 2012 . Retrieved 25 September 2012 .  Mckinnon V Government of The United States of America and Another House of Lords 16 June 2008 15. ... alleged to total over 700000 Text .  Fresh Leak on US Spying NSA Accessed Mexican Presidents Email . SPIEGEL ONLINE . 20 October 2013. Archived from the original on 6 November 2015.  Sanders Sam 4 June 2015. Massive Data Breach Puts 4 Million Federal Employees Records at Risk . NPR . Archived from the original on 5 June 2015 . Retrieved 5 June 2015 .  Liptak Kevin 4 June 2015. U.S. government hacked feds think China is the culprit . CNN . Archived from the original on 6 June 2015 . Retrieved 5 June 2015 .  Gallagher Sean. Encryption would not have helped at OPM says DHS official . Archived from the original on 24 June 2017.  Davis Michelle R. 19 October 2015. Schools Learn Lessons From Security Breaches . Education Week . Archived from the original on 10 June 2016 . Retrieved 23 May 2016 .  GEs Introduces ACUVision as a Single Panel Solution . www.securityinfowatch.com . Security Info Watch. 11 August 2005 . Retrieved 24 September 2019 .  Internet of Things Global Standards Initiative . ITU . Archived from the original on 26 June 2015 . Retrieved 26 June 2015 .  Singh Jatinder Pasquier Thomas Bacon Jean Ko Hajoon Eyers David 2015. Twenty Cloud Security Considerations for Supporting the Internet of Things PDF . IEEE Internet of Things Journal . 3 3 269 284. doi  10.1109JIOT.2015.2460333 . S2CID 4732406 .  Clearfield Chris. Why The FTC Cant Regulate The Internet Of Things . Forbes . Archived from the original on 27 June 2015 . Retrieved 26 June 2015 .  Internet of Things Science Fiction or Business Fact PDF . Harvard Business Review . Archived PDF from the original on 17 March 2015 . Retrieved 4 November 2016 .  Vermesan Ovidiu Friess Peter. Internet of Things Converging Technologies for Smart Environments and Integrated Ecosystems PDF . River Publishers. Archived PDF from the original on 12 October 2016 . Retrieved 4 November 2016 .  Clearfield Chris 20 June 2013. Rethinking Security for the Internet of Things . Harvard Business Review . Archived from the original on 20 September 2013.  Hotel room burglars exploit critical flaw in electronic door locks . Ars Technica . 26 November 2012. Archived from the original on 14 May 2016 . Retrieved 23 May 2016 .  Hospital Medical Devices Used As Weapons in Cyberattacks . Dark Reading . 6 August 2015. Archived from the original on 29 May 2016 . Retrieved 23 May 2016 .  Kirk Jeremy 17 October 2012. Pacemaker hack can deliver deadly 830volt jolt . Computerworld . Archived from the original on 4 June 2016 . Retrieved 23 May 2016 .  How Your Pacemaker Will Get Hacked . The Daily Beast . Kaiser Health News. 17 November 2014. Archived from the original on 20 May 2016 . Retrieved 23 May 2016 .  Leetaru Kalev. Hacking Hospitals And Holding Hostages Cybersecurity In 2016 . Forbes . Archived from the original on 29 December 2016 . Retrieved 29 December 2016 .  a b CyberAngriffe Krankenhuser rcken ins Visier der Hacker . Wirtschafts Woche. 7 December 2016. Archived from the original on 29 December 2016 . Retrieved 29 December 2016 .  Hospitals keep getting attacked by ransomware Heres why . Business Insider . Archived from the original on 29 December 2016 . Retrieved 29 December 2016 .  MedStar Hospitals Recovering After Ransomware Hack . NBC News . 31 March 2016. Archived from the original on 29 December 2016 . Retrieved 29 December 2016 .  Pauli Darren. US hospitals hacked with ancient exploits . The Register . Archived from the original on 16 November 2016 . Retrieved 29 December 2016 .  Pauli Darren. Zombie OS lurches through Royal Melbourne Hospital spreading virus . The Register . Archived from the original on 29 December 2016 . Retrieved 29 December 2016 .  Hacked Lincolnshire hospital computer systems back up  . BBC News . 2 November 2016. Archived from the original on 29 December 2016 . Retrieved 29 December 2016 .  Lincolnshire operations cancelled after network attack . BBC News . 31 October 2016. Archived from the original on 29 December 2016 . Retrieved 29 December 2016 .  Legion cyberattack Next dump is sansad.nic.in say hackers . The Indian Express . 12 December 2016. Archived from the original on 29 December 2016 . Retrieved 29 December 2016 .  Former New Hampshire Psychiatric Hospital Patient Accused Of Data Breach . CBS Boston. 27 December 2016. Archived from the original on 29 September 2017 . Retrieved 29 December 2016 .  Texas Hospital hacked affects nearly 30000 patient records . Healthcare IT News. 4 November 2016. Archived from the original on 29 December 2016 . Retrieved 29 December 2016 .  Becker Rachel 27 December 2016. New cybersecurity guidelines for medical devices tackle evolving threats . The Verge . Archived from the original on 28 December 2016 . Retrieved 29 December 2016 .  Postmarket Management of Cybersecurity in Medical Devices PDF . Food and Drug Administration . 28 December 2016. Archived PDF from the original on 29 December 2016 . Retrieved 29 December 2016 .  Brandt Jaclyn 18 June 2018. D.C. distributed energy proposal draws concerns of increased cybersecurity risks . Daily Energy Insider . Retrieved 4 July 2018 .  Current Releases  The Open Mobile Alliance . openmobilealliance.org .  Cashell B. Jackson W. D. Jickling M. Webel B. 2004. The Economic Impact of CyberAttacks PDF Report. Washington DC Congressional Research Service Government and Finance Division. RL32331.  Gordon Lawrence Loeb Martin November 2002. The Economics of Information Security Investment. ACM Transactions on Information and System Security . 5 4 438 457. doi  10.1145581271.581274 . S2CID 1500788 .  Sanger David E. Barnes Julian E. 20 December 2021. U.S. and Britain Help Ukraine Prepare for Potential Russian Cyberassault . The New York Times . ISSN 03624331 . Retrieved 4 December 2023 .  CyberAttack Against Ukrainian Critical Infrastructure  CISA . www.cisa.gov . 20 July 2021 . Retrieved 4 December 2023 .  Han Chen Dongre Rituja 2014. QA. What Motivates CyberAttackers . Technology Innovation Management Review . 4 10 40 42. doi  10.22215timreview838 . ISSN 19270321 .  Chermick Steven Freilich Joshua Holt Thomas April 2017. Exploring the Subculture of Ideologically Motivated CyberAttackers. Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice . 33 3 212 233. doi  10.11771043986217699100 . S2CID 152277480 .  Anderson Ross 2020. Security engineering a guide to building dependable distributed systems 3rded.. Indianapolis IN John Wiley  Sons. ISBN 9781119642817 . OCLC 1224516855 .  The Leading Cloud Recruiting Software . iCIMS . Retrieved 13 March 2021 .  Wilcox S. and Brown B. 2005 Responding to Security Incidents  Sooner or Later Your Systems Will Be Compromised Journal of Health Care Compliance  72 pp. 4148  a b Jonathan Zittrain The Future of The Internet Penguin Books 2008  Information Security Archived 6 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine . United States Department of Defense 1986  The TJX Companies Inc. Victimized by Computer System Intrusion Provides Information to Help Protect Customers Press release. The TJX Companies Inc. 17 January 2007. Archived from the original on 27 September 2012 . Retrieved 12 December 2009 .  Largest Customer Info Breach Grows Archived 28 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine . MyFox Twin Cities 29 March 2007.  The Stuxnet Attack On Irans Nuclear Plant Was Far More Dangerous Than Previously Thought . Business Insider . 20 November 2013. Archived from the original on 9 May 2014.  Reals Tucker 24 September 2010. Stuxnet Worm a U.S. CyberAttack on Iran Nukes . CBS News . Archived from the original on 16 October 2013.  Zetter Kim 17 February 2011. Cyberwar Issues Likely to Be Addressed Only After a Catastrophe . Wired . Archived from the original on 18 February 2011 . Retrieved 18 February 2011 .  Carroll Chris 18 October 2011. Cone of silence surrounds U.S. cyberwarfare . Stars and Stripes. Archived from the original on 7 March 2012 . Retrieved 30 October 2011 .  Bumgarner John 27 April 2010. Computers as Weapons of War PDF . IO Journal. Archived from the original PDF on 19 December 2011 . Retrieved 30 October 2011 .  Greenwald Glenn 6 June 2013. NSA collecting phone records of millions of Verizon customers daily . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 16 August 2013 . Retrieved 16 August 2013 . Exclusive Top secret court order requiring Verizon to hand over all call data shows scale of domestic surveillance under Obama  Seipel Hubert. Transcript ARD interview with Edward Snowden . La Foundation Courage . Archived from the original on 14 July 2014 . Retrieved 11 June 2014 .  Newman Lily Hay 9 October 2013. Can You Trust NIST . IEEE Spectrum . Archived from the original on 1 February 2016.  NIST Removes Cryptography Algorithm from Random Number Generator Recommendations . National Institute of Standards and Technology . 21 April 2014.  New Snowden Leak NSA Tapped Google Yahoo Data Centers Archived 9 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine  31 October 2013 Lorenzo FranceschiBicchierai mashable.com  Riley Michael Elgin Ben Lawrence Dune Matlack Carol 17 March 2014. Target Missed Warnings in Epic Hack of Credit Card Data . Businessweek . Archived from the original on 27 January 2015.  Rosenblatt Seth 6 November 2014. Home Depot says 53 million emails stolen . CNET . CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on 9 December 2014.  Millions more Americans hit by government personnel data hack . Reuters . 9 July 2017. Archived from the original on 28 February 2017 . Retrieved 25 February 2017 .  Barrett Devlin 4 June 2015. U.S. Suspects Hackers in China Breached About four 4 Million Peoples Records Officials Say . The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on 4 June 2015.  Risen Tom 5 June 2015. China Suspected in Theft of Federal Employee Records . U.S. News  World Report . Archived from the original on 6 June 2015.  Zengerle Patricia 19 July 2015. Estimate of Americans hit by government personnel data hack skyrockets . Reuters . Archived from the original on 10 July 2015.  Sanger David 5 June 2015. Hacking Linked to China Exposes Millions of U.S. Workers . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 5 June 2015.  MansfieldDevine Steve 1 September 2015. The Ashley Madison affair. Network Security . 2015 9 8 16. doi  10.1016S1353485815300805 .  Turton W. Mehrotra K. 4 June 2021. Hackers Breached Colonial Pipeline Using Compromised Password . Bloomberg L.P . Retrieved 3 December 2023 .  a b Mikko Hypponen Fighting viruses defending the net . TED. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013.  Mikko Hypponen  Behind Enemy Lines . Hack in the Box Security Conference. 9 December 2012. Archived from the original on 25 November 2016.  Ensuring the Security of Federal Information Systems and Cyber Critical Infrastructure and Protecting the Privacy of Personally Identifiable Information . Government Accountability Office. Archived from the original on 19 November 2015 . Retrieved 3 November 2015 .  King Georgia 23 May 2018. The Venn diagram between libertarians and crypto bros is so close its basically a circle . Quartz .  Kirby Carrie 24 June 2011. Former White House aide backs some Net regulation  Clarke says government industry deserve F in cyber security . The San Francisco Chronicle .  McCarthy Daniel 11 June 2018. Privatizing Political Authority Cybersecurity PublicPrivate Partnerships and the Reproduction of Liberal Political Order . Politics and Governance . 6 2 5 12. doi  10.17645pag.v6i2.1335 .  Its Time to Treat Cybersecurity as a Human Rights Issue . Human Rights Watch . 26 May 2020 . Retrieved 26 May 2020 .  FIRST Mission . FIRST . Retrieved 6 July 2018 .  FIRST Members . FIRST . Retrieved 6 July 2018 .  European council . Archived from the original on 3 December 2014.  MAAWG . Archived from the original on 23 September 2014.  MAAWG . Archived from the original on 17 October 2014.  Government of Canada Launches Canadas Cyber Security Strategy . Market Wired . 3 October 2010. Archived from the original on 2 November 2014 . Retrieved 1 November 2014 .  a b Canadas Cyber Security Strategy . Public Safety Canada . Government of Canada. Archived from the original on 2 November 2014 . Retrieved 1 November 2014 .  a b c Action Plan 20102015 for Canadas Cyber Security Strategy . Public Safety Canada . Government of Canada. Archived from the original on 2 November 2014 . Retrieved 3 November 2014 .  Cyber Incident Management Framework For Canada . Public Safety Canada . Government of Canada. Archived from the original on 2 November 2014 . Retrieved 3 November 2014 .  Action Plan 20102015 for Canadas Cyber Security Strategy . Public Safety Canada . Government of Canada. Archived from the original on 2 November 2014 . Retrieved 1 November 2014 .  Canadian Cyber Incident Response Centre . Public Safety Canada . Archived from the original on 8 October 2014 . Retrieved 1 November 2014 .  Cyber Security Bulletins . Public Safety Canada . Archived from the original on 8 October 2014 . Retrieved 1 November 2014 .  Report a Cyber Security Incident . Public Safety Canada . Government of Canada. Archived from the original on 11 November 2014 . Retrieved 3 November 2014 .  Government of Canada Launches Cyber Security Awareness Month With New Public Awareness Partnership . Market Wired . Government of Canada. 27 September 2012. Archived from the original on 3 November 2014 . Retrieved 3 November 2014 .  Cyber Security Cooperation Program . Public Safety Canada . Archived from the original on 2 November 2014 . Retrieved 1 November 2014 .  Cyber Security Cooperation Program . Public Safety Canada . 16 December 2015. Archived from the original on 2 November 2014.  GetCyberSafe . Get Cyber Safe . Government of Canada. Archived from the original on 11 November 2014 . Retrieved 3 November 2014 .  Australian federal government announces cybersecurity support for SMBs 20232030 Australian Cyber Security Strategy . Retrieved 22 November 2023 .  Need for proper structure of PPPs to address specific cyberspace risks . Archived from the original on 13 November 2017.  National Cyber Safety and Security StandardsNCSSSHome . www.ncdrc.res.in . Archived from the original on 19 February 2018 . Retrieved 19 February 2018 .  South Korea seeks global support in cyber attack probe. BBC Monitoring Asia Pacific . 7 March 2011.  Jun Kwanwoo 23 September 2013. Seoul Puts a Price on Cyberdefense . The Wall Street Journal . Dow Jones  Company Inc. Archived from the original on 25 September 2013 . Retrieved 24 September 2013 .  White House March 2023. National security strategy PDF . No.March 2032. white house. US gov.  Adil Sajid 16 October 2023. Do You Know About Biggest Cybersecurity Threats In 2023 . Cybernexguard . Adil Sajid . Retrieved 18 December 2023 .  Adil Sajid September 2018. National Cyber Strategy of the United States of America . University Libraries UNT Digital Library . Retrieved 18 December 2023 .  Adil Sajid September 2018. Do You Know About Biggest Cybersecurity Threats In 2023 . University Libraries UNT Digital Library . Retrieved 18 December 2023 .  International Cybercrime Reporting and Cooperation Act at Congress.gov  Home  Homeland Security  Governmental Affairs Committee . www.hsgac.senate.gov . Archived from the original on 20 January 2012.  Biden Adviser On Cyber Threats And The New Executive Order To Combat Them . NPR .  Executive Order on Improving the Nations Cybersecurity full text  National Cyber Security Division . U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Archived from the original on 11 June 2008 . Retrieved 14 June 2008 .  a b FAQ Cyber Security RD Center . U.S. Department of Homeland Security ST Directorate. Archived from the original on 6 October 2008 . Retrieved 14 June 2008 .  AFPJiJi U.S. boots up cybersecurity center 31 October 2009.  Federal Bureau of Investigation  Priorities . Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on 11 July 2016.  Internet Crime Complaint Center IC3  Home . Archived from the original on 20 November 2011.  Infragard Official Site . Infragard . Archived from the original on 9 September 2010 . Retrieved 10 September 2010 .  Robert S. Mueller III  InfraGard Interview at the 2005 InfraGard Conference . Infragard Official Site  Media Room . Archived from the original on 17 June 2011 . Retrieved 9 December 2009 .  CCIPS . 25 March 2015. Archived from the original on 23 August 2006.  A Framework for a Vulnerability Disclosure Program for Online Systems . Cybersecurity Unit Computer Crime  Intellectual Property Section Criminal Division U.S. Department of Justice. July 2017 . Retrieved 9 July 2018 .  Mission and Vision . www.cybercom.mil . Retrieved 20 June 2020 .  William J. Lynn III 12 November 2009. Remarks at the Defense Information Technology Acquisition Summit Speech. Washington D.C. Archived from the original on 15 April 2010 . Retrieved 10 July 2010 .  Shachtman Noah 23 September 2010. Militarys Cyber Commander Swears No Role in Civilian Networks . brookings.edu . Archived from the original on 6 November 2010.  FCC Cybersecurity . FCC. Archived from the original on 27 May 2010 . Retrieved 3 December 2014 .  Cybersecurity for Medical Devices and Hospital Networks FDA Safety Communication . Food and Drug Administration . Archived from the original on 28 May 2016 . Retrieved 23 May 2016 .  Automotive Cybersecurity  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration NHTSA . Archived from the original on 25 May 2016 . Retrieved 23 May 2016 .  Air Traffic Control FAA Needs a More Comprehensive Approach to Address Cybersecurity As Agency Transitions to NextGen Report. U. S. Government Accountability Office. 14 April 2015. Archived from the original on 13 June 2016 . Retrieved 23 May 2016 .  Sternstein Aliya 4 March 2016. FAA Working on New Guidelines for HackProof Planes . Nextgov . Archived from the original on 19 May 2016 . Retrieved 23 May 2016 .  Elias Bart 18 June 2015. Protecting Civil Aviation from Cyberattacks PDF . Archived PDF from the original on 17 October 2016 . Retrieved 4 November 2016 .  Anderson David Reimers Karl 2019. CYBER SECURITY EMPLOYMENT POLICY AND WORKPLACE DEMAND IN THE U.S. GOVERNMENT . EDULEARN19 Proceedings. Vol.1. IATED. pp. 7858 7866. doi  10.21125edulearn.2019.1914 . ISBN 9788409120314 . ISSN 23401117 .  Verton Dan 28 January 2004. DHS launches national cyber alert system . Computerworld . IDG. Archived from the original on 31 August 2005 . Retrieved 15 June 2008 .  Details can be found in 10 CFR 73.54 Protection of digital computer and communication systems and networks .  Cyber Security Plan for Nuclear Power Reactors  Nuclear Energy Institute  Refer to NEI 0809 for more details.  Clayton Mark 7 March 2011. The new cyber arms race . The Christian Science Monitor . Archived from the original on 16 April 2015 . Retrieved 16 April 2015 .  Nakashima Ellen 13 September 2016. Obama to be urged to split cyberwar command from NSA . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 12 October 2016 . Retrieved 15 June 2017 .  Overland Indra 1 March 2019. The geopolitics of renewable energy Debunking four emerging myths . Energy Research  Social Science . 49  36 40. Bibcode  2019ERSS...49...36O . doi  10.1016j.erss.2018.10.018 . hdl  112502579292 . ISSN 22146296 .  Maness Ryan C. Valeriano Brandon 11 June 2018. How We Stopped Worrying about Cyber Doom and Started Collecting Data . Politics and Governance . 6 2 49 60. doi  10.17645pag.v6i2.1368 . hdl  1094560589 . ISSN 21832463 .  Maness Ryan C. Valeriano Brandon 25 March 2015. The Impact of Cyber Conflict on International Interactions. Armed Forces  Society . 42 2 301 323. doi  10.11770095327x15572997 . ISSN 0095327X . S2CID 146145942 .  Bullard Brittany 2016. Style and Statistics The Art of Retail Analytics . Wiley. doi  10.10029781119271260.ch8 . ISBN 9781119270317 .  Oltsik Jon 18 March 2016. Cybersecurity Skills Shortage Impact on Cloud Computing . Network World . Archived from the original on 23 March 2016 . Retrieved 23 March 2016 .  Robinson Terry 30 May 2018. Why is a Degree in Cyber Security one of the Best . DegreeQuery.com . Archived from the original on 10 October 2021 . Retrieved 10 October 2021 .  de Silva Richard 11 October 2011. Government vs. Commerce The Cyber Security Industry and You Part One . Defence IQ. Archived from the original on 24 April 2014 . Retrieved 24 April 2014 .  Department of Computer Science . Archived from the original on 3 June 2013 . Retrieved 30 April 2013 .  About Cyber Security architect . cisa.gov . 1 August 2021 . Retrieved 1 January 2022 .  How to become a Chief Information Security Officer CISO . cybersecuritycareer.org . 1 August 2021 . Retrieved 4 January 2022 .  Data Protection Officers . ico.org.uk . January 2021.  Student Cybersecurity Resources . NICCS US National Initiative for Cybercareers and Studies. Archived from the original on 5 November 2020.  Current Job Opportunities at DHS . U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Archived from the original on 2 May 2013 . Retrieved 5 May 2013 .  Cybersecurity Training  Exercises . U.S. Department of Homeland Security. 12 May 2010. Archived from the original on 7 January 2015 . Retrieved 9 January 2015 .  Cyber Security Awareness Free Training and Webcasts . MSISAC MultiState Information Sharing  Analysis Center. Archived from the original on 6 January 2015 . Retrieved 9 January 2015 .  DoD Approved 8570 Baseline Certifications . iase.disa.mil . Archived from the original on 21 October 2016 . Retrieved 19 June 2017 .  The UK Cyber Security Strategy Report on Progress and Forward Plans December 2014 PDF . United Kingdom Cabinet Office. Archived PDF from the original on 18 April 2018 . Retrieved 20 August 2021 .  Cyber skills for a vibrant and secure UK . GOV.UK .  Singapore Operational Technology OT Cybersecurity Competency Framework . Cyber Security Agency Press release. 8 October 2021. Archived from the original on 16 October 2021 . Retrieved 23 October 2021 .  Confidentiality . Retrieved 31 October 2011 .  Data Integrity . Archived from the original on 6 November 2011 . Retrieved 31 October 2011 .  Endpoint Security . 10 November 2010. Archived from the original on 16 March 2014 . Retrieved 15 March 2014 .  A Brief History of the Cybersecurity Profession . ISACA . Retrieved 13 October 2023 .  One step ahead in computing security . RIT . Retrieved 13 October 2023 .  a b Misa Thomas J. 2016. Computer Security Discourse at RAND SDC and NSA 19581970 . IEEE Annals of the History of Computing . 38 4 12 25. doi  10.1109MAHC.2016.48 . S2CID 17609542 .  Neumann A. J. Statland N. Webb R. D. 1977. Postprocessing audit tools and techniques PDF . nist.gov . US Department of Commerce National Bureau of Standards. pp.113114. Archived PDF from the original on 10 October 2016 . Retrieved 19 June 2020 .  Irwin Luke 5 April 2018. How NIST can protect the CIA triad including the often overlooked I  integrity . www.itgovernanceusa.com . Retrieved 16 January 2021 .  Perrin Chad 30 June 2008. The CIA Triad . techrepublic.com . Retrieved 31 May 2012 .  Stoneburner G. Hayden C. Feringa A. 2004. Engineering Principles for Information Technology Security PDF Report. csrc.nist.gov. doi  10.6028NIST.SP.80027rA . Archived PDF from the original on 12 October 2004. Note this document has been superseded by later versions.  Yost Jeffrey R. April 2015. The Origin and Early History of the Computer Security Software Products Industry . IEEE Annals of the History of Computing . 37 2 46 58. doi  10.1109MAHC.2015.21 . ISSN 19341547 . S2CID 18929482 .  A Brief History of Computer Viruses  What the Future Holds . www.kaspersky.com . 19 April 2023 . Retrieved 12 June 2024 .  First incident of cyberespionage . Guinness World Records . Retrieved 23 January 2024 .  FBI News 2 November 2018. The Morris Worm  30 Years Since First Major Attack on the Internet . fbi.gov . Retrieved 23 January 2024 .  1993 Mosaic Launches and the Web is Set Free . Web Development History . 8 December 2021.  Web Design Museum  Netscape Navigator 2.0 . 10 March 2023 . Retrieved 4 December 2023 .  Nakashima Ellen 26 January 2008. Bush Order Expands Network Monitoring Intelligence Agencies to Track Intrusions . The Washington Post . Retrieved 8 February 2021 .  a b Perlroth Nicole 7 February 2021. How the U.S. Lost to Hackers . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 28 December 2021 . Retrieved 9 February 2021 .  Perlroth Nicole Sanger David Shane Scott 6 May 2019. How Chinese Spies Got the N.S.A.s Hacking Tools and Used Them for Attacks . The New York Times . Retrieved 18 October 2024 . Further reading  edit  Library resources about Computer security Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Branch Jordan 24 September 2020. Whats in a Name Metaphors and Cybersecurity. International Organization . 75 1. Cambridge University Press CUP 39 70. doi  10.1017s002081832000051x . ISSN 00208183 . S2CID 224886794 . Costigan Sean Hennessy Michael 2016. Cybersecurity A Generic Reference Curriculum PDF . NATO. ISBN 9789284501960 . Archived PDF from the original on 10 March 2017. Fuller Christopher J 11 June 2018. The Roots of the United States Cyber InSecurity DOC . Diplomatic History . 43 1. Oxford University Press OUP 157 185. doi  10.1093dhdhy038 . ISSN 01452096 . Bob Yonah Jeremy 21 August 2021. ExIDF cyber intel. official reveals secrets behind cyber offense . The Jerusalem Post . Kim Peter 2014. The Hacker Playbook Practical Guide To Penetration Testing . Seattle CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform . ISBN 9781494932633 . Lee Newton 2015. Counterterrorism and Cybersecurity Total Information Awareness 2nded.. Springer. ISBN 9783319172439 . Montagnani Maria Lill Cavallo Mirta Antonella 2018. Cybersecurity and Liability in a Big Data World . Market and Competition Law Review . 2 2. Elsevier BV 71 98. doi  10.2139ssrn.3220475 . ISSN 15565068 . S2CID 216704215 . SSRN 3220475 . Shariati Marzieh Bahmani Faezeh Shams Fereidoon 2011. Enterprise information security a review of architectures and frameworks from interoperability perspective . Procedia Computer Science . 3 . Elsevier BV 537 543. doi  10.1016j.procs.2010.12.089 . ISSN 18770509 . Singer P. W. Friedman Allan 2014. Cybersecurity and Cyberwar What Everyone Needs to Know . Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199918119 . Wu ChwanHwa John Irwin J. David 2013. Introduction to Computer Networks and Cybersecurity . Boca Raton CRC Press. ISBN 9781466572133 . Cybersecurity Best Practices  Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency CISA. n.d.. Retrieved April 24 2024 from httpswww.cisa.govtopicscybersecuritybestpractices SztyberBetley A. Syfert M. Kocielny J. M.  Grecka Z. 2023. Controller CyberAttack Detection and Isolation  Sensors 14248220. Sensors 14248220 235 2778. doi  10.3390s23052778 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Computer security . v t e Information security Related security categories Computer security Automotive security Cybercrime Cybersex trafficking Computer fraud Cybergeddon Cyberterrorism Cyberwarfare Electromagnetic warfare Information warfare Internet security Mobile security Network security Copy protection Digital rights management vectorial version Threats Adware Advanced persistent threat Arbitrary code execution Backdoors Bombs Fork Logic Time Zip Hardware backdoors Code injection Crimeware Crosssite scripting Crosssite leaks DOM clobbering History sniffing Cryptojacking Botnets Data breach Driveby download Browser Helper Objects Viruses Data scraping Denialofservice attack Eavesdropping Email fraud Email spoofing Exploits Fraudulent dialers Hacktivism Infostealer Insecure direct object reference Keystroke loggers Malware Payload Phishing Voice Polymorphic engine Privilege escalation Ransomware Rootkits Scareware Shellcode Spamming Social engineering Spyware Software bugs Trojan horses Hardware Trojans Remote access trojans Vulnerability Web shells Wiper Worms SQL injection Rogue security software Zombie Defenses Application security Secure coding Secure by default Secure by design Misuse case Computer access control Authentication Multifactor authentication Authorization Computer security software Antivirus software Securityfocused operating system Datacentric security Obfuscation software Data masking Encryption Firewall Intrusion detection system Hostbased intrusion detection system HIDS Anomaly detection Information security management Information risk management Security information and event management SIEM Runtime application selfprotection Site isolation v t e Computer science Note This template roughly follows the 2012 ACM Computing Classification System . Hardware Printed circuit board Peripheral Integrated circuit Very Large Scale Integration Systems on Chip SoCs Energy consumption Green computing Electronic design automation Hardware acceleration Processor Size  Form Computer systems organization Computer architecture Computational complexity Dependability Embedded system Realtime computing Networks Network architecture Network protocol Network components Network scheduler Network performance evaluation Network service Software organization Interpreter Middleware Virtual machine Operating system Software quality Software notations and tools Programming paradigm Programming language Compiler Domainspecific language Modeling language Software framework Integrated development environment Software configuration management Software library Software repository Software development Control variable Software development process Requirements analysis Software design Software construction Software deployment Software engineering Software maintenance Programming team Opensource model Theory of computation Model of computation Stochastic Formal language Automata theory Computability theory Computational complexity theory Logic Semantics Algorithms Algorithm design Analysis of algorithms Algorithmic efficiency Randomized algorithm Computational geometry Mathematics of computing Discrete mathematics Probability Statistics Mathematical software Information theory Mathematical analysis Numerical analysis Theoretical computer science Information systems Database management system Information storage systems Enterprise information system Social information systems Geographic information system Decision support system Process control system Multimedia information system Data mining Digital library Computing platform Digital marketing World Wide Web Information retrieval Security Cryptography Formal methods Security hacker Security services Intrusion detection system Hardware security Network security Information security Application security Humancomputer interaction Interaction design Social computing Ubiquitous computing Visualization Accessibility Concurrency Concurrent computing Parallel computing Distributed computing Multithreading Multiprocessing Artificial intelligence Natural language processing Knowledge representation and reasoning Computer vision Automated planning and scheduling Search methodology Control method Philosophy of artificial intelligence Distributed artificial intelligence Machine learning Supervised learning Unsupervised learning Reinforcement learning Multitask learning Crossvalidation Graphics Animation Rendering Photograph manipulation Graphics processing unit Mixed reality Virtual reality Image compression Solid modeling Applied computing Quantum Computing Ecommerce Enterprise software Computational mathematics Computational physics Computational chemistry Computational biology Computational social science Computational engineering Differentiable computing Computational healthcare Digital art Electronic publishing Cyberwarfare Electronic voting Video games Word processing Operations research Educational technology Document management Category Outline Glossaries Authority control databases  National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic 2 Poland Israel