Creating email spam or phishing messages with a forged sender identity or address Email spoofing is the creation of email messages with a forged sender address.  1  The term applies to email purporting to be from an address which is not actually the senders mail sent in reply to that address may bounce or be delivered to an unrelated party whose identity has been faked. Disposable email address or masked email is a different topic providing a masked email address that is not the users normal address which is not disclosed for example so that it cannot be harvested  but forwards mail sent to it to the users real address.  2  The original transmission protocols used for email do not have builtin authentication methods this deficiency allows spam and phishing emails to use spoofing in order to mislead the recipient. More recent countermeasures have made such spoofing from internet sources more difficult but they have not eliminated it completely few internal networks have defences against a spoof email from a colleagues compromised computer on that network. Individuals and businesses deceived by spoof emails may suffer significant financial losses in particular spoofed emails are often used to infect computers with ransomware . Technical details  edit  When a Simple Mail Transfer Protocol SMTP email is sent the initial connection provides two pieces of address information MAIL FROM generally presented to the recipient as the Returnpath header but not normally visible to the end user and by default no checks are done that the sending system is authorized to send on behalf of that address. RCPT TO specifies which email address the email is delivered to is not normally visible to the end user but may be present in the headers as part of the Received header. Together these are sometimes referred to as the envelope addressing  an analogy to a traditional paper envelope .  3  Unless the receiving mail server signals that it has problems with either of these items the sending system sends the DATA command and typically sends several header items including From Joe Q Doe joeqdoeexample.com  the address visible to the recipient but again by default no checks are done that the sending system is authorized to send on behalf of that address. Replyto Jane Roe Jane.Roeexample.mil  similarly not checked Sender Jin Jo jin.joexample.jp  also not checked The result is that the email recipient sees the email as having come from the address in the From header. They may sometimes be able to find the MAIL FROM address and if they reply to the email it will go to either the address presented in the From or Replyto header but none of these addresses are typically reliable  4  so automated bounce messages may generate backscatter . Although email spoofing is effective in forging the email address the IP address of the computer sending the mail can generally be identified from the Received lines in the email header.  5  In malicious cases however this is likely to be the computer of an innocent third party infected by malware that is sending the email without the owners knowledge. Malicious use of spoofing  edit  Phishing and business email compromise scams generally involve an element of email spoofing. Email spoofing has been responsible for public incidents with serious business and financial consequences. This was the case in an October 2013 email to a news agency which was spoofed to look as if it was from the Swedish company Fingerprint Cards . The email stated that Samsung offered to purchase the company. The news spread and the companys stock price surged by 50.  6  Malware such as Klez and Sober among many more modern examples often search for email addresses within the computer they have infected and they use those addresses both as targets for email and also to create credible forged From fields in the emails that they send.  citation needed  This is to ensure that the emails are more likely to be opened. For example Alice is sent an infected email which she opens running the worm code. The worm code searches Alices email address book and finds the addresses of Bob and Charlie. From Alices computer the worm sends an infected email to Bob but is forged to appear as if it was sent by Charlie. In this case even if Bobs system detects the incoming mail as containing malware he sees the source as being Charlie even though it really came from Alices computer. Meanwhile Alice may remain unaware that her computer has been infected and Charlie does not know anything about it at all unless he receives an error message from Bob. The effect on mail servers  edit  Traditionally mail servers could accept a mail item then later send a NonDelivery Report or bounce message if it could not be delivered or had been quarantined for any reason. These would be sent to the MAIL FROM a.k.a. Return Path address. With the massive rise in forged addresses best practice is now to not generate NDRs for detected spam viruses etc.  7  but to reject the email during the SMTP transaction. When mail administrators fail to take this approach their systems are guilty of sending  backscatter  emails to innocent parties  in itself a form of spam  or being used to perform  Joe job  attacks. Countermeasures  edit  The SSLTLS system used to encrypt servertoserver email traffic can also be used to enforce authentication but in practice it is seldom used  8  and a range of other potential solutions have also failed to gain traction. A number of defensive systems have come into wide use including Sender Policy Framework SPF   an email authentication method designed to detect forging sender addresses during the delivery of the email.  9  DomainKeys Identified Mail DKIM   an email authentication method designed to detect forged sender addresses in email email spoofing a technique often used in phishing and email spam . Domainbased Message Authentication Reporting and Conformance DMARC    an email authentication protocol. It is designed to give email domain owners the ability to protect their domain from unauthorized use commonly known as email spoofing. The purpose and primary outcome of implementing DMARC is to protect a domain from being used in business email compromise attacks  phishing emails email scams and other cyber threat activities. To effectively stop forged email being delivered the sending domains their mail servers and the receiving system all need to be configured correctly for these higher standards of authentication. Although their use is increasing estimates vary widely as to what percentage of emails have no form of domain authentication from 8.6  10  to almost half.  11   12   13  For this reason receiving mail systems typically have a range of settings to configure how they treat poorlyconfigured domains or email.  14   15  While there has been research into improving email security little emphasis has been placed on informing users whose email addresses have been used for spoofing. Currently only the email recipient can identify a fake email and users whose addresses are spoofed remain unaware unless the recipient manually scrutinizes the message.  citation needed  Business email  edit  Business email compromise attacks are a class of cyber crime which use email fraud to attack organizations. Examples include invoice scams and spearphishing attacks which are designed to gather data for other criminal activities. A business deceived by an email spoof can suffer additional financial business continuity and reputational damage. Fake emails can also be used to spread malware . Typically an attack targets specific employee roles within an organization by sending spoof emails which fraudulently represent a senior colleague trusted customer or supplier.  16  This type of attack is known as spear phishing . The email will issue instructions such as approving payments or releasing client data. The emails often use social engineering to trick the victim into making money transfers to the bank account of the fraudster.  17  The United States Federal Bureau of Investigation recorded 26 billion of US and international losses associated with BEC attacks between June 2016 and July 2019.  18  More recent figures estimate losses of over 50 billion from 2013 to 2022.  19  Incidents  edit  Dublin Zoo lost 130000 in such a scam in 2017  a total of 500000 was taken though most was recovered.  20  The Austrian aerospace firm FACC AG was defrauded of 42 million 47 million through an attack in February 2016  and subsequently fired both the CFO and CEO.  21  Te Wananga o Aotearoa in New Zealand was defrauded of 120000 NZD.  22  The New Zealand Fire Service was scammed out of 52000 in 2015.  23  Ubiquiti Networks lost 46.7 million through such a scam in 2015.  24  Save the Children USA was the victim of a 1 million cyberscam in 2017.  25  Australian organisations that reported business email compromise attacks on the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission  26  suffered approximately 2800000 AUD in financial losses for the 2018 year.  27  In 2013 Evaldas Rimasauskas and his employees sent thousands of fraud emails to get access to companies email systems.  28  See also  edit  Chain letter  Letter written in succession by a group of people Computer virus  Computer program that modifies other programs to replicate itself and spread Computer worm  Selfreplicating malware program Cybersecurity regulation  Information assurance IA requirements overview Cybercrime  Type of crime based in computer networks Domain nameDomain name spoofing  Identification string in the Internet that may be compromised DMARC  System to prevent email fraud Email authentication  Techniques aimed at providing verifiable information about the origin of email messages Hoax  Widespread deliberate fabrication presented as truth Joe job  Unsolicited email with spoofed sender data Phishing  Form of social engineering Prank call  Phone call intended as a joke or prank Social engineering security  Psychological manipulation of people into performing actions or divulging confidential information Website spoofing  Creating a website as a hoax with the intention of misleading readers References  edit   Varshney Gaurav Misra Manoj Atrey Pradeep K. 20161026. A survey and classification of web phishing detection schemes Phishing is a fraudulent act that is used to deceive users . Security and Communication Networks . 9 18 6266 6284. doi  10.1002sec.1674 .  Yee Alaina 6 June 2022. What is masked email This new spin on an old practice supercharges your security . PCWorld .  Siebenmann Chris. A quick overview of SMTP . University of Toronto. Archived from the original on 20190403 . Retrieved 20190408 .  Barnes Bill 20020312. EMail Impersonators . Slate . Archived from the original on 20190413 . Retrieved 20190408 .  email impersonators identifying spoofed email . Archived from the original on 20170621 . Retrieved 20190408 .  Mundy Simon 11 October 2013. Fraudsters fingerprints on fake Samsung deal . Financial Times . Archived from the original on 20190210 . Retrieved 20190408 .  See RFC3834  Transport Layer Security for Inbound Mail . Google Postini Services . Archived from the original on 20161111 . Retrieved 20190408 .  Carranza Pablo 16 July 2013. How To use an SPF Record to Prevent Spoofing  Improve Email Reliability . DigitalOcean . Archived from the original on 20 April 2015 . Retrieved 23 September 2019 . A carefully tailored SPF record will reduce the likelihood of your domain name getting fraudulently spoofed and keep your messages from getting flagged as spam before they reach your recipients. Email spoofing is the creation of email messages with a forged sender address something that is simple to do because many mail servers do not perform authentication. Spam and phishing emails typically use such spoofing to mislead the recipient about the origin of the message.  Bursztein Elie Eranti Vijay 20131206. Internetwide efforts to fight email phishing are working . Google Security Blog. Archived from the original on 20190404 . Retrieved 20190408 .  Eggert Lars. SPF Deployment Trends . Archived from the original on 20160402 . Retrieved 20190408 .  Eggert Lars. DKIM Deployment Trends . Archived from the original on 20180822 . Retrieved 20190408 .  In First Year DMARC Protects 60 Percent of Global Consumer Mailboxes . dmarc.org . 20130206. Archived from the original on 20180920 . Retrieved 20190408 .  Prevent spoofed messages with spoofed senders detection . Archived from the original on 20190323 . Retrieved 20190408 .  Antispoofing protection in Office 365 . Archived from the original on 20190409 . Retrieved 20190408 .  Joan Goodchild 20 June 2018. How to Recognize a Business Email Compromise Attack . Security Intelligence . Archived from the original on 23 March 2019 . Retrieved 11 March 2019 .  Tips to Avoid Phishing Attacks and Social Engineering . www.bankinfosecurity.com . Archived from the original on 20201202 . Retrieved 20201117 .  Business Email Compromise Is Extremely Costly And Increasingly Preventable . Forbes Media . 15 April 2020. Archived from the original on 23 October 2021 . Retrieved 2 December 2020 .  Business Email Compromise The 50 Billion Scam .  Dublin Zoo lost 500k after falling victim to cyberscam . 22 December 2017. Archived from the original on 8 August 2019 . Retrieved 23 October 2021 .  Austrias FACC hit by cyber fraud fires CEO . Reuters . 26 May 2016. Archived from the original on 21 March 2021 . Retrieved 20 December 2018 .  Te Wananga o Aotearoa caught up in 120k financial scam . NZ Herald. 20 December 2015. Archived from the original on 20 December 2018 . Retrieved 20 December 2018 .  Fire Service scammed out of 52000 . RNZ News . 23 December 2015. Archived from the original on 20 December 2018 . Retrieved 20 December 2018 .  Hackett Robert August 10 2015. Fraudsters duped this company into handing over 40 million . Fortune magazine . Archived from the original on 20 December 2018 . Retrieved 20 December 2018 .  Wallack Todd 13 December 2018. Hackers fooled Save the Children into sending 1 million to a phony account . The Boston Globe . Archived from the original on 20 December 2018 . Retrieved 20 December 2018 .  Australian Competition and Consumer Commission  Powell Dominic 27 November 2018. Business loses 300000 to spoofed email scam How to protect yourself from being impersonated . Smart Company . Archived from the original on 27 November 2018 . Retrieved 14 December 2018 .  Sentence in BEC Scheme . Federal Bureau of Investigation . Archived from the original on 20200131 . Retrieved 20200201 . External links  edit  2002 Tech Tip SpoofedForged Email . SEI Digital Library . Carnegie Mellon University. 20020101 . Retrieved 20191219 . v t e Information security Related security categories Computer security Automotive security Cybercrime Cybersex trafficking Computer fraud Cybergeddon Cyberterrorism Cyberwarfare Electromagnetic warfare Information warfare Internet security Mobile security Network security Copy protection Digital rights management vectorial version Threats Adware Advanced persistent threat Arbitrary code execution Backdoors Bombs Fork Logic Time Zip Hardware backdoors Code injection Crimeware Crosssite scripting Crosssite leaks DOM clobbering History sniffing Cryptojacking Botnets Data breach Driveby download Browser Helper Objects Viruses Data scraping Denialofservice attack Eavesdropping Email fraud Email spoofing Exploits Fraudulent dialers Hacktivism Infostealer Insecure direct object reference Keystroke loggers Malware Payload Phishing Voice Polymorphic engine Privilege escalation Ransomware Rootkits Scareware Shellcode Spamming Social engineering Spyware Software bugs Trojan horses Hardware Trojans Remote access trojans Vulnerability Web shells Wiper Worms SQL injection Rogue security software Zombie Defenses Application security Secure coding Secure by default Secure by design Misuse case Computer access control Authentication Multifactor authentication Authorization Computer security software Antivirus software Securityfocused operating system Datacentric security Obfuscation software Data masking Encryption Firewall Intrusion detection system Hostbased intrusion detection system HIDS Anomaly detection Information security management Information risk management Security information and event management SIEM Runtime application selfprotection Site isolation v t e Scams and confidence tricks Terminology Scam Error account Shill Shyster Sucker list Variants Advancefee scam Art student scam Badger game Baitandswitch Black money scam Blessing scam Bogus escrow Boiler room Bride scam Charity fraud Clip joint Coinmatching game Coin rolling scams Drop swindle Embarrassing cheque Exit scam Extraterrestrial real estate Fiddle game Fine print Foreclosure rescue scheme Foreign exchange fraud Fortune telling fraud Gem scam Getrichquick scheme Green goods scam Hustling Indian coal allocation scam IRS impersonation scam Intellectual property scams Kansas City Shuffle Locksmith scam Long firm Mismarking Mock auction Moving scam Overpayment scam Patent safe Pig in a poke Pigeon drop Pork barrel Pump and dump RedemptionA4V schemes Reloading scam Return fraud Salting Shell game Sick baby hoax SIM swap scam Slavery reparations scam Spanish Prisoner SSA impersonation scam SSC Scam Strip search phone call scam Swampland in Florida Tarmac scam Technical support scam Telemarketing fraud Thai tailor scam Thai zig zag scam Threecard monte Trojan horse Wash trading White van speaker scam Workathome scheme Internet scams and countermeasures Avalanche Pig Butchering Carding Catfishing Click fraud Clickjacking Cramming Cryptocurrency scams Cybercrime CyberThrill DarkMarket Domain name scams Email authentication Email fraud Internet vigilantism Lenny antiscam bot Lottery scam PayPai Phishing Referer spoofing Ripoff Report Rock Phish Romance scam Russian Business Network SaferNet Scam baiting 419eater.com Jim Browning Kitboga Scammer Payback ShadowCrew Spoofed URL Spoofing attack Stock Generation Voice phishing Website reputation ratings Pyramid and Ponzi schemes Aman Futures Group Bernard Cornfeld Caritas Dona Branca Earl Jones Ezubao Foundation for New Era Philanthropy Franchise fraud Highyield investment program HYIP Investors Overseas Service Kapa investment scam Kubus scheme Madoff investment scandal Make Money Fast Matrix scheme MMM Petters Group Worldwide Pyramid schemes in Albania Reed Slatkin Saradha Group financial scandal Secret Sister Scott W. Rothstein Stanford Financial Group Welsh Thrasher faith scam WinCapita Lists Con artists Confidence tricks Criminal enterprises gangs and syndicates Impostors In the media Film and television Literature Ponzi schemes v t e Unsolicited digital communication Protocols Email spam Address munging Bulk email software Directory harvest attack DNSBL DNSWL Email spoofing Image spam Joe job Pink contract Spambot Other Auto dialer Cold calling Flyposting Junk fax Messaging Mobile phone Newsgroup Robocall Spambot Telemarketing VoIP Antispam Clientside Challengeresponse spam filtering Context filtering Disposable email address Distributed Checksum Clearinghouse Email authentication Greylisting List poisoning Naive Bayes spam filtering SORBS SpamCop Spamhaus Spamdexing Blog spam Cloaking Doorway page Forum spam Google bombing Keyword stuffing Link farm Referrer spam Scraper site Social spam Spam blogs Sping URL redirection Internet fraud Advancefee scam Lottery scam Make Money Fast Phishing Voice