Malware that collects and transmits user information without their knowledge It has been suggested that Privacyinvasive software be merged into this article.  Discuss  Proposed since September 2024. Part of a series on Computer hacking History Phreaking Cryptovirology Hacking of consumer electronics List of hackers Hacker culture and ethic Hackathon Hacker Manifesto Hackerspace Hacktivism Maker culture Types of hackers Black hat Grey hat White hat Conferences Black Hat Briefings Chaos Communication Congress DEF CON Hackers on Planet Earth Security BSides ShmooCon Summercon Computer crime Crimeware List of computer criminals Script kiddie Hacking tools Exploit forensicsfocused operating systems Payload Social engineering Vulnerability Practice sites HackThisSite ZoneH Malware Rootkit Backdoor Trojan horse Virus Worm Spyware Ransomware Logic bomb Botnet Keystroke logging HIDS Web shell RCE Infostealer Computer security Application security Cloud computing security Network security Groups Anonymous Chaos Computer Club Homebrew Computer Club defunct Legion of Doom defunct LulzSec defunct Masters of Deception defunct Red team  Blue team Publications 2600 The Hacker Quarterly Hacker News Nuts and Volts Phrack v t e Spyware a portmanteau for spying software  is any malware that aims to gather information about a person or organization and send it to another entity in a way that harms the user by violating their privacy  endangering their devices security or other means. This behavior may be present in other malware and in legitimate software. Websites may engage in spyware behaviors like web tracking . Hardware devices may also be affected.  1  Spyware is frequently associated with advertising and involves many of the same issues . Because these behaviors are so common and can have nonharmful uses providing a precise definition of spyware is a difficult task.  2  History  edit  The first recorded use of the term spyware occurred on October 16 1995 in a Usenet post that poked fun at Microsoft s business model .  3  Spyware at first denoted software meant for espionage purposes. However in early 2000 the founder of Zone Labs  Gregor Freund used the term in a press release for the ZoneAlarm Personal Firewall .  4  Later in 2000 a parent using ZoneAlarm was alerted to the fact that Reader Rabbit  educational software marketed to children by the Mattel toy company was surreptitiously sending data back to Mattel.  5  Since then spyware has taken on its present sense. According to a 2005 study by AOL and the National CyberSecurity Alliance 61 percent of surveyed users computers were infected with some form of spyware. 92 percent of surveyed users with spyware reported that they did not know of its presence and 91 percent reported that they had not given permission for the installation of the spyware.  6  As of 2006 update  spyware has become one of the preeminent security threats to computer systems running Microsoft Windows operating systems . Computers on which Internet Explorer IE was the primary browser are particularly vulnerable to such attacks not only because IE was the most widely used  7  but also because its tight integration with Windows allows spyware access to crucial parts of the operating system.  7   8  Before Internet Explorer 6 SP2 was released as part of Windows XP Service Pack 2  the browser would automatically display an installation window for any ActiveX component that a website wanted to install. The combination of user ignorance about these changes and the assumption by Internet Explorer that all ActiveX components are benign helped to spread spyware significantly. Many spyware components would also make use of exploits in JavaScript  Internet Explorer and Windows to install without user knowledge or permission. The Windows Registry contains multiple sections where modification of key values allows software to be executed automatically when the operating system boots. Spyware can exploit this design to circumvent attempts at removal. The spyware typically links itself to each location in the registry that allows execution. Once running the spyware will periodically check if any of these links are removed. If so they will be automatically restored. This ensures that the spyware will execute when the operating system is booted even if some or most of the registry links are removed. Overview  edit  Spyware is mostly classified into four types adware  system monitors tracking including web tracking  and trojans   9  examples of other notorious types include digital rights management capabilities that phone home keyloggers  rootkits  and web beacons . These four categories are not mutually exclusive and they have similar tactics in attacking networks and devices.  10  The main goal is to install hack into the network avoid being detected and safely remove themselves from the network.  10  Spyware is mostly used for the stealing information and storing Internet users movements on the Web and serving up popup ads to Internet users.  11  Whenever spyware is used for malicious purposes its presence is typically hidden from the user and can be difficult to detect. Some spyware such as keyloggers  may be installed by the owner of a shared corporate or public computer intentionally in order to monitor users. While the term spyware suggests software that monitors a users computer the functions of spyware can extend beyond simple monitoring. Spyware can collect almost any type of data including personal information like internet surfing habits user logins and bank or credit account information. Spyware can also interfere with a users control of a computer by installing additional software or redirecting web browsers .  12  Some spyware can change computer settings which can result in slow Internet connection speeds unauthorized changes in browser settings or changes to software settings. Sometimes spyware is included along with genuine software and may come from a malicious website or may have been added to the intentional functionality of genuine software see the paragraph about Facebook  below. In response to the emergence of spyware a small industry has sprung up dealing in antispyware software. Running antispyware software has become a widely recognized element of computer security practices especially for computers running Microsoft Windows . A number of jurisdictions have passed antispyware laws which usually target any software that is surreptitiously installed to control a users computer. In Germanspeaking countries spyware used or made by the government is called govware by computer experts in common parlance Regierungstrojaner  literally Government Trojan. Govware is typically a trojan horse software used to intercept communications from the target computer. Some countries like Switzerland and Germany have a legal framework governing the use of such software.  13   14  In the US the term  policeware  has been used for similar purposes.  15  Use of the term spyware has eventually declined as the practice of tracking users has been pushed ever further into the mainstream by major websites and data mining companies these generally break no known laws and compel users to be tracked not by fraudulent practices per se  but by the default settings created for users and the language of termsofservice agreements. In one documented example on CBSCNet News reported on March 7 2011 an analysis in The Wall Street Journal revealed the practice of Facebook and other websites of tracking users browsing activity  which is linked to their identity far beyond users visits and activity on the Facebook site itself. The report stated Heres how it works. You go to Facebook you log in you spend some time there and then ... you move on without logging out. Lets say the next site you go to is The New York Times . Those buttons without you clicking on them have just reported back to Facebook and Twitter that you went there and also your identity within those accounts. Lets say you moved on to something like a site about depression. This one also has a tweet button a Google widget and those too can report back who you are and that you went there. The Wall Street Journal analysis was researched by Brian Kennish founder of Disconnect Inc.  16  Routes of infection  edit  Spyware does not necessarily spread in the same way as a virus or worm because infected systems generally do not attempt to transmit or copy the software to other computers. Instead spyware installs itself on a system by deceiving the user or by exploiting software vulnerabilities. Most spyware is installed without knowledge or by using deceptive tactics. Spyware may try to deceive users by bundling itself with desirable software. Other common tactics are using a Trojan horse  spy gadgets that look like normal devices but turn out to be something else such as a USB Keylogger. These devices actually are connected to the device as memory units but are capable of recording each stroke made on the keyboard. Some spyware authors infect a system through security holes in the Web browser or in other software. When the user navigates to a Web page controlled by the spyware author the page contains code which attacks the browser and forces the download and installation of spyware. The installation of spyware frequently involves Internet Explorer . Its popularity and history of security issues have made it a frequent target. Its deep integration with the Windows environment make it susceptible to attack into the Windows operating system . Internet Explorer also serves as a point of attachment for spyware in the form of Browser Helper Objects  which modify the browsers behaviour. Effects and behaviors  edit  This section relies largely or entirely upon a single source . Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources at this section.  December 2018   Learn how and when to remove this message  A spyware program rarely operates alone on a computer an affected machine usually has multiple infections. Users frequently notice unwanted behavior and degradation of system performance. A spyware infestation can create significant unwanted CPU activity disk usage and network traffic. Stability issues such as applications freezing failure to boot and systemwide crashes are also common. Usually this effect is intentional but may be caused from the malware simply requiring large amounts of computing power disk space or network usage. Spyware which interferes with networking software commonly causes difficulty connecting to the Internet. In some infections the spyware is not even evident. Users assume in those situations that the performance issues relate to faulty hardware Windows installation problems or another malware infection. Some owners of badly infected systems resort to contacting technical support experts or even buying a new computer because the existing system has become too slow. Badly infected systems may require a clean reinstallation of all their software in order to return to full functionality. Moreover some types of spyware disable software firewalls and antivirus software  andor reduce browser security settings which opens the system to further opportunistic infections . Some spyware disables or even removes competing spyware programs on the grounds that more spywarerelated annoyances increase the likelihood that users will take action to remove the programs.  17  Keyloggers are sometimes part of malware packages downloaded onto computers without the owners knowledge. Some keylogger software is freely available on the internet while others are commercial or private applications. Most keyloggers allow not only keyboard keystrokes to be captured they also are often capable of collecting screen captures from the computer. A typical Windows user has administrative privileges  mostly for convenience. Because of this any program the user runs has unrestricted access to the system. As with other operating systems  Windows users are able to follow the principle of least privilege and use non administrator accounts. Alternatively they can reduce the privileges of specific vulnerable Internetfacing processes  such as Internet Explorer . Since Windows Vista is by default a computer administrator that runs everything under limited user privileges when a program requires administrative privileges a User Account Control popup will prompt the user to allow or deny the action. This improves on the design used by previous versions of Windows.
Spyware is also known as tracking software. Remedies and prevention  edit  See also Computer virus  Virus removal As the spyware threat has evolved a number of techniques have emerged to counteract it. These include programs designed to remove or block spyware as well as various user practices which reduce the chance of getting spyware on a system. Nonetheless spyware remains a costly problem. When a large number of pieces of spyware have infected a Windows computer the only remedy may involve backing up user data and fully reinstalling the operating system . For instance some spyware cannot be completely removed by Symantec Microsoft PC Tools. Antispyware programs  edit  See also CategorySpyware removal Many programmers and some commercial firms have released products designed to remove or block spyware. Programs such as PC Tools Spyware Doctor  Lavasofts AdAware SE and Patrick Kollas Spybot  Search  Destroy rapidly gained popularity as tools to remove and in some cases intercept spyware programs. In December 2004 Microsoft acquired the GIANT AntiSpyware software  18  rebranding it as Microsoft AntiSpyware Beta 1 and releasing it as a free download for Genuine Windows XP and Windows 2003 users. In November 2005 it was renamed Windows Defender .  19   20  Major antivirus firms such as Symantec  PC Tools  McAfee and Sophos have also added antispyware features to their existing antivirus products. Early on antivirus firms expressed reluctance to add antispyware functions citing lawsuits brought by spyware authors against the authors of web sites and programs which described their products as spyware. However recent versions of these major firms home and business antivirus products do include antispyware functions albeit treated differently from viruses. Symantec AntiVirus for instance categorizes spyware programs as extended threats and now offers realtime protection against these threats. Other Antispyware tools include FlexiSPY Mobilespy mSPY TheWiSPY and UMobix.  21  How antispyware software works  edit  Antispyware programs can combat spyware in two ways They can provide realtime protection in a manner similar to that of antivirus protection all incoming network data is scanned for spyware and any detected threats are blocked. Antispyware software programs can be used solely for detection and removal of spyware software that has already been installed into the computer. This kind of antispyware can often be set to scan on a regular schedule. Such programs inspect the contents of the Windows registry  operating system files and installed programs  and remove files and entries which match a list of known spyware. Realtime protection from spyware works identically to realtime antivirus protection the software scans disk files at download time and blocks the activity of components known to represent spyware.
In some cases it may also intercept attempts to install startup items or to modify browser settings. Earlier versions of antispyware programs focused chiefly on detection and removal. Javacool Softwares SpywareBlaster  one of the first to offer realtime protection blocked the installation of ActiveX based spyware. Like most antivirus software many antispywareadware tools require a frequently updated database of threats. As new spyware programs are released antispyware developers discover and evaluate them adding to the list of known spyware which allows the software to detect and remove new spyware. As a result antispyware software is of limited usefulness without regular updates. Updates may be installed automatically or manually. A popular generic spyware removal tool used by those that requires a certain degree of expertise is HijackThis  which scans certain areas of the Windows OS where spyware often resides and presents a list with items to delete manually. As most of the items are legitimate windows filesregistry entries it is advised for those who are less knowledgeable on this subject to post a HijackThis log on the numerous antispyware sites and let the experts decide what to delete. If a spyware program is not blocked and manages to get itself installed it may resist attempts to terminate or uninstall it. Some programs work in pairs when an antispyware scanner or the user terminates one running process the other one respawns the killed program. Likewise some spyware will detect attempts to remove registry keys and immediately add them again. Usually booting the infected computer in safe mode allows an antispyware program a better chance of removing persistent spyware. Killing the process tree may also work. Security practices  edit  To detect spyware computer users have found several practices useful in addition to installing antispyware programs.  Many users have installed a web browser other than Internet Explorer  such as Mozilla Firefox or Google Chrome . Though no browser is completely safe Internet Explorer was once at a greater risk for spyware infection due to its large user base as well as vulnerabilities such as ActiveX but these three major browsers are now close to equivalent when it comes to security.  22   23  Some ISPs particularly colleges and universitieshave taken a different approach to blocking spyware they use their network firewalls and web proxies to block access to Web sites known to install spyware. On March 31 2005 Cornell University s Information Technology department released a report detailing the behavior of one particular piece of proxybased spyware Marketscore  and the steps the university took to intercept it.  24  Many other educational institutions have taken similar steps. Individual users can also install firewalls from a variety of companies.  These monitor the flow of information going to and from a networked computer and provide protection against spyware and malware.  Some users install a large hosts file which prevents the users computer from connecting to known spywarerelated web addresses.  Spyware may get installed via certain shareware programs offered for download. Downloading programs only from reputable sources can provide some protection from this source of attack.  25  Individual users can use cellphone  computer with physical electric switch or isolated electronic switch that disconnects microphone camera without bypass and keep it in disconnected position where not in use that limits information that spyware can collect. Policy recommended by NIST Guidelines for Managing the Security of Mobile Devices 2013. Applications  edit  Stealware and affiliate fraud  edit  A few spyware vendors notably 180 Solutions  have written what the New York Times has dubbed  stealware  and what spyware researcher Ben Edelman terms affiliate fraud  a form of click fraud . Stealware diverts the payment of affiliate marketing revenues from the legitimate affiliate to the spyware vendor. Spyware which attacks affiliate networks places the spyware operators affiliate tag on the users activity  replacing any other tag if there is one. The spyware operator is the only party that gains from this. The user has their choices thwarted a legitimate affiliate loses revenue networks reputations are injured and vendors are harmed by having to pay out affiliate revenues to an affiliate who is not party to a contract.  26  Affiliate fraud is a violation of the terms of service of most affiliate marketing networks. Mobile devices can also be vulnerable to chargeware  which manipulates users into illegitimate mobile charges. Identity theft and fraud  edit  In one case spyware has been closely associated with identity theft .  27  In August 2005 researchers from security software firm Sunbelt Software suspected the creators of the common CoolWebSearch spyware had used it to transmit  chat sessions  user names  passwords  bank information etc.  28  however it turned out that it actually was its own sophisticated criminal little trojan thats independent of CWS.  29  This case was investigated by the FBI . The Federal Trade Commission estimates that 27.3 million Americans have been victims of identity theft and that financial losses from identity theft totaled nearly 48 billion for businesses and financial institutions and at least 5 billion in outofpocket expenses for individuals.  30  Digital rights management  edit  Some copyprotection technologies have borrowed from spyware. In 2005 Sony BMG Music Entertainment was found to be using rootkits in its XCP digital rights management technology  31  Like spyware not only was it difficult to detect and uninstall it was so poorly written that most efforts to remove it could have rendered computers unable to function. Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott filed suit  32  and three separate classaction suits were filed.  33  Sony BMG later provided a workaround on its website to help users remove it.  34  Beginning on April 25 2006 Microsofts Windows Genuine Advantage Notifications application  35  was installed on most Windows PCs as a critical security update. While the main purpose of this deliberately uninstallable application is to ensure the copy of Windows on the machine was lawfully purchased and installed it also installs software that has been accused of  phoning home  on a daily basis like spyware.  36   37  It can be removed with the RemoveWGA tool. Personal relationships  edit  Stalkerware is spyware that has been used to monitor electronic activities of partners in intimate relationships. At least one software package Loverspy was specifically marketed for this purpose. Depending on local laws regarding communalmarital property observing a partners online activity without their consent may be illegal the author of Loverspy and several users of the product were indicted in California in 2005 on charges of wiretapping and various computer crimes.  38  Browser cookies  edit  Antispyware programs often report Web advertisers HTTP cookies  the small text files that track browsing activity as spyware. While they are not always inherently malicious many users object to third parties using space on their personal computers for their business purposes and many antispyware programs offer to remove them.  39  Shameware  edit  Shameware or  accountability software  is a type of spyware that is not hidden from the user but operates with their knowledge if not necessarily their consent. Parents religious leaders or other authority figures may require their children or congregation members to install such software which is intended to detect the viewing of pornography or other content deemed inappropriate and to report it to the authority figure who may then confront the user about it.  40  Spyware programs  edit  Main article List of spyware programs These common spyware programs illustrate the diversity of behaviors found in these attacks. Note that as with computer viruses researchers give names to spyware programs which may not be used by their creators. Programs may be grouped into families based not on shared program code but on common behaviors or by following the money of apparent financial or business connections. For instance a number of the spyware programs distributed by Claria are collectively known as Gator. Likewise programs that are frequently installed together may be described as parts of the same spyware package even if they function separately. Spyware vendors  edit  Spyware vendors include NSO Group  which in the 2010s sold spyware to governments for spying on human rights activists and journalists .  41   42   43  NSO Group was investigated by Citizen Lab .  41   43  Rogue antispyware programs  edit  See also List of rogue security software and Rogue security software Malicious programmers have released a large number of rogue fake antispyware programs and widely distributed Web banner ads can warn users that their computers have been infected with spyware directing them to purchase programs which do not actually remove spywareor else may add more spyware of their own.  44   45  The recent update proliferation of fake or spoofed antivirus products that bill themselves as antispyware can be troublesome.  Users may receive popups prompting them to install them to protect their computer when it will in fact add spyware. It is recommended that users do not install any freeware claiming to be antispyware unless it is verified to be legitimate. Some known offenders include AntiVirus 360  Antivirus 2009 MacSweeper Pest Trap PSGuard Spy Wiper Spydawn Spylocked Spysheriff SpyShredder Spyware Quake SpywareStrike WinAntiVirus Pro 2006 Windows Police Pro WinFixer  46  WorldAntiSpy Fake antivirus products constitute 15 percent of all malware.  47  On January 26 2006 Microsoft and the Washington state attorney general filed suit against Secure Computer for its Spyware Cleaner product.  48  Legal issues  edit  Criminal law  edit  Unauthorized access to a computer is illegal under computer crime laws such as the U.S. Computer Fraud and Abuse Act  the U.K.s Computer Misuse Act  and similar laws in other countries. Since owners of computers infected with spyware generally claim that they never authorized the installation a prima facie reading would suggest that the promulgation of spyware would count as a criminal act. Law enforcement has often pursued the authors of other malware particularly viruses. However few spyware developers have been prosecuted and many operate openly as strictly legitimate businesses though some have faced lawsuits.  49   50  Spyware producers argue that contrary to the users claims users do in fact give consent to installations. Spyware that comes bundled with shareware applications may be described in the legalese text of an enduser license agreement EULA. Many users habitually ignore these purported contracts but spyware companies such as Claria say these demonstrate that users have consented. Despite the ubiquity of EULAs agreements under which a single click can be taken as consent to the entire text relatively little caselaw has resulted from their use. It has been established in most common law jurisdictions that this type of agreement can be a binding contract in certain circumstances.  51  This does not however mean that every such agreement is a contract or that every term in one is enforceable. Some jurisdictions including the U.S. states of Iowa  52  and Washington   53  have passed laws criminalizing some forms of spyware. Such laws make it illegal for anyone other than the owner or operator of a computer to install software that alters Webbrowser settings monitors keystrokes or disables computersecurity software. In the United States lawmakers introduced a bill in 2005 entitled the Internet Spyware Prevention Act  which would imprison creators of spyware.  54  Additionally several diplomatic efforts have been made to curb the growing usage of Spywares. Launched by France and the UK in early 2024 the Pall Mall Process  55  aims to address the proliferation and irresponsible use of commercial cyber intrusion capabilities. Administrative sanctions  edit  US FTC actions  edit  The US Federal Trade Commission has sued Internet marketing organizations under the  unfairness doctrine   56  to make them stop infecting consumers PCs with spyware. In one case that against Seismic Entertainment Productions the FTC accused the defendants of developing a program that seized control of PCs nationwide infected them with spyware and other malicious software bombarded them with a barrage of popup advertising for Seismics clients exposed the PCs to security risks and caused them to malfunction. Seismic then offered to sell the victims an antispyware program to fix the computers and stop the popups and other problems that Seismic had caused. On November 21 2006 a settlement was entered in federal court under which a 1.75 million judgment was imposed in one case and 1.86 million in another but the defendants were insolvent  57  In a second case brought against CyberSpy Software LLC the FTC charged that CyberSpy marketed and sold RemoteSpy keylogger spyware to clients who would then secretly monitor unsuspecting consumers computers. According to the FTC Cyberspy touted RemoteSpy as a 100 undetectable way to Spy on Anyone. From Anywhere. The FTC has obtained a temporary order prohibiting the defendants from selling the software and disconnecting from the Internet any of their servers that collect store or provide access to information that this software has gathered. The case is still in its preliminary stages.  A complaint filed by the Electronic Privacy Information Center EPIC brought the RemoteSpy software to the FTCs attention.  58  Netherlands OPTA  edit  An administrative fine the first of its kind in Europe has been issued by the Independent Authority of Posts and Telecommunications OPTA from the Netherlands. It applied fines in total value of Euro 1000000 for infecting 22 million computers. The spyware concerned is called DollarRevenue. The law articles that have been violated are art. 4.1 of the Decision on universal service providers and on the interests of end users the fines have been issued based on art. 15.4 taken together with art. 15.10 of the Dutch telecommunications law.  59  Civil law  edit  Former New York State Attorney General and former Governor of New York Eliot Spitzer has pursued spyware companies for fraudulent installation of software.  60  In a suit brought in 2005 by Spitzer the California firm Intermix Media Inc. ended up settling by agreeing to pay US7.5 million and to stop distributing spyware.  61  The hijacking of Web advertisements has also led to litigation. In June 2002 a number of large Web publishers sued Claria for replacing advertisements but settled out of court. Courts have not yet had to decide whether advertisers can be held liable for spyware that displays their ads. In many cases the companies whose advertisements appear in spyware popups do not directly do business with the spyware firm. Rather they have contracted with an advertising agency  which in turn contracts with an online subcontractor who gets paid by the number of impressions or appearances of the advertisement. Some major firms such as Dell Computer and MercedesBenz have sacked advertising agencies that have run their ads in spyware.  62  Libel suits by spyware developers  edit  Litigation has gone both ways. Since spyware has become a common pejorative  some makers have filed libel and defamation actions when their products have been so described. In 2003 Gator now known as Claria filed suit against the website PC Pitstop for describing its program as spyware.  63  PC Pitstop settled agreeing not to use the word spyware but continues to describe harm caused by the GatorClaria software.  64  As a result other antispyware and antivirus companies have also used other terms such as potentially unwanted programs or greyware to denote these products. WebcamGate  edit  Main article Robbins v. Lower Merion School District In the 2010 WebcamGate case plaintiffs charged two suburban Philadelphia high schools secretly spied on students by surreptitiously and remotely activating webcams embedded in schoolissued laptops the students were using at home and therefore infringed on their privacy rights.  The school loaded each students computer with LANrev s remote activation tracking software.  This included the nowdiscontinued TheftTrack.  While TheftTrack was not enabled by default on the software the program allowed the school district to elect to activate it and to choose which of the TheftTrack surveillance options the school wanted to enable.  65  TheftTrack allowed school district employees to secretly remotely activate the webcam embedded in the students laptop above the laptops screen. That allowed school officials to secretly take photos through the webcam of whatever was in front of it and in its line of sight and send the photos to the schools server. The LANrev software disabled the webcams for all other uses  e.g.  students were unable to use Photo Booth or video chat  so most students mistakenly believed their webcams did not work at all. On top of the webcam surveillance TheftTrack allowed school officials to take screenshots and send them to the schools server. School officials were also granted the ability to take snapshots of instant messages web browsing music playlists and written compositions. The schools admitted to secretly snapping over 66000 webshots and screenshots  including webcam shots of students in their bedrooms.  65   66   67  See also  edit  Cuckoos egg metaphor Cyber spying Employee monitoring software Industrial espionage Infostealer Malware Phishing Superfish Technical support scam Microphone blocker References  edit   Amazon Workers Are Listening to What You Tell Alexa . Bloomberg.com . April 10 2019. Archived from the original on August 29 2020 . Retrieved August 25 2020 .  Monitoring Software on Your PC Spyware Adware and Other Software PDF Report. March 2005. Archived from the original PDF on December 26 2010.  Vossen Roland attributed October 21 1995 Win 95 Source code in c posted to rec..programmer retrieved from groups.google.com November 28 2006.  dead link    Wienbar Sharon.  The Spyware Inferno Archived May 10 2011 at the Wayback Machine . News.com . August 13 2004.  Hawkins Dana  Privacy Worries Arise Over Spyware in Kids Software . U.S. News  World Report . June 25 2000 Archived November 3 2013 at the Wayback Machine   AOLNCSA Online Safety Study Archived December 13 2005 at the Wayback Machine . America Online  The National Cyber Security Alliance . 2005.  a b Spanbauer Scott.  Is It Time to Ditch IE Archived December 16 2006 at the Wayback Machine . Pcworld.com . September 1 2004  Keizer Gregg.  Analyzing IE At 10 Integration With OS Smart Or Not . TechWeb Technology News . August 25 2005. Archived September 29 2007 at the Wayback Machine  SPYWARE PDF . Archived from the original PDF on November 1 2013 . Retrieved February 5 2016 .  a b Kim Taejin Yi Jeong Hyun Seo Changho January 2014. Spyware Resistant Smartphone User Authentication Scheme . International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks . 10 3 237125. doi  10.11552014237125 . ISSN 15501477 . S2CID 12611804 .  Bergren Martha Dewey October 1 2004. Spyware . The Journal of School Nursing . 20 5 293 294. doi  10.117710598405040200050801 . ISSN 10598405 . PMID 15469380 .  Ames Wes 2004. Understanding spyware risk and response. IT Professional . 6 5 25 29. doi  10.1109MITP.2004.71 .  Basil Cupa Trojan Horse Resurrected On the Legality of the Use of Government Spyware Govware Archived February 1 2014 at the Wayback Machine  LISS 2013 pp. 419428  FAQ  Häufig gestellte Fragen Archived May 6 2013 at the Wayback Machine  Jeremy Reimer July 20 2007. The tricky issue of spyware with a badge meet policeware  . Ars Technica . Archived from the original on November 6 2012 . Retrieved June 15 2017 .  Cooley Brian March 7 2011.  Like tweet buttons divulge sites you visit CNET News Video . CNet News . Archived from the original on March 10 2016 . Retrieved March 7 2011 .  Edelman Ben December 7 2004 updated February 8 2005 Direct Revenue Deletes Competitors from Users Disks Archived July 6 2010 at the Wayback Machine  benedelman.com. Retrieved November 28 2006.  Microsoft Acquires AntiSpyware Leader GIANT Company . PressPass . December 16 2004. Archived from the original on June 17 2005 . Retrieved December 21 2020 .  Garms Jason November 4 2005. Whats in a name A lot Announcing Windows Defender . blogs.technet.com . Archived from the original on November 23 2005 . Retrieved December 21 2020 .  Dodson Steve November 4 2005. Microsoft Windows AntiSpyware is now......Windows Defender . blogs.technet.com . Archived from the original on November 24 2005 . Retrieved December 21 2020 .  Qabalin Majdi K. Naser Muawya Alkasassbeh Mouhammd August 2 2022. Android Spyware Detection Using Machine Learning A Novel Dataset . Sensors . 22 15 5765. doi  10.3390s22155765 . ISSN 14248220 . PMC 9371186 . PMID 35957337 .  Stefan Frei Thomas Duebendofer Gunter Ollman and Martin May Understanding the Web browser threat Examination of vulnerable online Web browser populations and the insecurity iceberg Archived September 11 2016 at the Wayback Machine  Communication Systems Group 2008  Virvilis Nikos Mylonas Alexios Tsalis Nikolaos Gritzalis Dimitris 2015. Security Busters Web Browser security vs. rogue sites. Computers  Security . 52  90 105. doi  10.1016j.cose.2015.04.009 .  Schuster Steve.  Blocking Marketscore Why Cornell Did It . Archived from the original on February 14 2007. . Cornell University Office of Information Technologies. March 31 2005.  Vincentas July 11 2013. Information About Spyware in SpyWareLoop.com . Spyware Loop . Archived from the original on November 3 2013 . Retrieved July 27 2013 .  Edelman Ben 2004.  The Effect of 180solutions on Affiliate Commissions and Merchants Archived July 6 2010 at the Wayback Machine . Benedelman.org . Retrieved November 14 2006.  Ecker Clint 2005. Massive spywarebased identity theft ring uncovered Archived September 16 2008 at the Wayback Machine . Ars Technica August 5 2005.  Eckelberry Alex. Massive identity theft ring Archived May 11 2011 at the Wayback Machine  SunbeltBLOG August 4 2005.  Alex Eckelberry August 9 2005. Identity Theft What to do . The Legacy Sunbelt Software Blog . Archived from the original on March 19 2018 . Retrieved March 19 2018 .  FTC Releases Survey of Identity Theft in U.S. 27.3 Million Victims in Past 5 Years Billions in Losses for Businesses and Consumers Archived May 18 2008 at the Wayback Machine . Federal Trade Commission September 3 2003.  Russinovich Mark. Sony Rootkits and Digital Rights Management Gone Too Far Archived April 28 2010 at the Wayback Machine  Marks Blog October 31 2005. Retrieved November 22 2006.  Press release from the Texas Attorney Generals office November 21 2005 Attorney General Abbott Brings First Enforcement Action In Nation Against Sony BMG For Spyware Violations Archived July 25 2010 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved November 28 2006.  Sony sued over copyprotected CDs Sony BMG is facing three lawsuits over its controversial antipiracy software Archived May 30 2009 at the Wayback Machine  BBC News November 10 2005. Retrieved November 22 2006.  Information About XCP Protected CDs . Retrieved November 29 2006.  Description of the Windows Genuine Advantage Notifications application . Microsoft Support . Archived from the original on June 18 2010 . Retrieved June 13 2006 .  Weinstein Lauren. Windows XP update may be classified as spyware Archived July 9 2012 at archive.today  Lauren Weinsteins Blog June 5 2006. Retrieved June 13 2006.  Evers Joris. Microsofts antipiracy tool phones home daily Archived August 28 2012 at the Wayback Machine  CNET June 7 2006. Retrieved August 31 2014.  Creator and Four Users of Loverspy Spyware Program Indicted . Department of Justice. August 26 2005. Archived from the original on November 19 2013 . Retrieved November 21 2014 .  Tracking Cookie . Symantec. Archived from the original on January 6 2010 . Retrieved April 28 2013 .  Mehrotra Dhruv. The Ungodly Surveillance of AntiPorn Shameware Apps . Wired . ISSN 10591028 . Retrieved September 22 2022 .  a b Timberg Craig Albergotti Reed Guéguen Elodie July 19 2021. Despite the hype Apple security no match for NSO spyware  International investigation finds 23 Apple devices that were successfully hacked . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on July 19 2021 . Retrieved July 19 2021 .  Activists and journalists in Mexico complain of government spying . Reuters . June 20 2017. Archived from the original on May 13 2023 . Retrieved June 20 2017 .  a b FranceschiBicchierai Lorenzo August 25 2016. Government Hackers Caught Using Unprecedented iPhone Spy Tool . VICE Magazine . Archived from the original on February 24 2023 . Retrieved August 25 2016 .  Roberts Paul F. May 26 2005. SpywareRemoval Program Tagged as a Trap . eWeek . Retrieved September 4 2008 .  permanent dead link    Howes Eric L.  The Spyware Warrior List of RogueSuspect AntiSpyware Products  Web Sites Archived September 22 2018 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved July 10 2005.  Also known as WinAntiVirusPro ErrorSafe SystemDoctor WinAntiSpyware AVSystemCare WinAntiSpy Windows Police Pro Performance Optimizer StorageProtector PrivacyProtector WinReanimator DriveCleaner WinspywareProtect PCTurboPro FreePCSecure ErrorProtector SysProtect WinSoftware XPAntivirus Personal Antivirus Home Antivirus 20xx VirusDoctor and ECsecure  Elinor Mills April 27 2010. Google Fake antivirus is 15 percent of all malware . CNET . Archived from the original on May 10 2011 . Retrieved November 5 2011 .  McMillan Robert. Antispyware Company Sued Under Spyware Law Archived July 6 2008 at the Wayback Machine . PC World January 26 2006.   Lawsuit filed against 180solutions Archived June 22 2008 at the Wayback Machine . zdnet.com September 13 2005  Hu Jim.  180solutions sues allies over adware Archived August 10 2011 at the Wayback Machine . news.com July 28 2004  Coollawyer 20012006 Privacy Policies Terms and Conditions Website Contracts Website Agreements Archived May 13 2013 at the Wayback Machine  coollawyer.com. Retrieved November 28 2006.   CHAPTER 715 Computer Spyware and Malware Protection Archived April 6 2012 at the Wayback Machine . nxtsearch.legis.state.ia.us . Retrieved May 11 2011.  Chapter 19.270 RCW Computer spyware Archived July 21 2011 at the Wayback Machine . apps.leg.wa.gov . Retrieved November 14 2006.  Gross Grant. US lawmakers introduce ISpy bill Archived January 8 2009 at the Wayback Machine . InfoWorld March 16 2007. Retrieved March 24 2007.  The Pall Mall Process declaration tackling the proliferation and irresponsible use of commercial cyber intrusion capabilities . GOV.UK . Retrieved October 27 2024 .  See Federal Trade Commission v. Sperry  Hutchinson Trading Stamp Co.  FTC Permanently Halts Unlawful Spyware Operations Archived November 2 2013 at the Wayback Machine FTC press release with links to supporting documents see also FTC cracks down on spyware and PC hijacking but not true lies Archived December 26 2010 at the Wayback Machine  Micro Law IEEE MICRO Jan.Feb. 2005 also available at IEEE Xplore .  See Court Orders Halt to Sale of Spyware Archived December 4 2010 at the Wayback Machine FTC press release November 17 2008 with links to supporting documents.  OPTA November 5 2007. Besluit van het college van de Onafhankelijke Post en Telecommunicatie Autoriteit op grond van artikel 15.4 juncto artikel 15.10 van de Telecommunicatiewet tot oplegging van boetes ter zake van overtredingen van het gestelde bij of krachtens de Telecommunicatiewet PDF . Archived from the original PDF on January 29 2011.  State Sues Major Spyware Distributor Press release. Office of New York State Attorney General. April 28 2005. Archived from the original on January 10 2009 . Retrieved September 4 2008 . Attorney General Spitzer today sued one of the nations leading internet marketing companies alleging that the firm was the source of spyware and adware that has been secretly installed on millions of home computers.  Gormley Michael. Intermix Media Inc. says it is settling spyware lawsuit with N.Y. attorney general . Yahoo News . June 15 2005. Archived from the original on June 22 2005.  Gormley Michael June 25 2005. Major advertisers caught in spyware net . USA Today . Archived from the original on September 20 2008 . Retrieved September 4 2008 .  Festa Paul.  See you later antiGators Archived July 14 2014 at the Wayback Machine . News.com . October 22 2003.   Gator Information Center Archived July 1 2005 at the Wayback Machine . pcpitstop.com November 14 2005.  a b Initial LANrev System Findings Archived June 15 2010 at the Wayback Machine  LMSD Redacted Forensic Analysis L3 Services  prepared for Ballard Spahr LMSDs counsel May 2010. Retrieved August 15 2010.  Doug Stanglin February 18 2010. School district accused of spying on kids via laptop webcams . USA Today . Archived from the original on September 13 2012 . Retrieved February 19 2010 .  Suit Schools Spied on Students Via Webcam . CBS NEWS . March 8 2010. Archived from the original on August 1 2013 . Retrieved July 29 2013 . External links  edit  Wikimedia Commons has media related to Spyware . Home Computer Security  Carnegie Mellon Software Institute v t e Information security Related security categories Computer security Automotive security Cybercrime Cybersex trafficking Computer fraud Cybergeddon Cyberterrorism Cyberwarfare Electromagnetic warfare Information warfare Internet security Mobile security Network security Copy protection Digital rights management vectorial version Threats Adware Advanced persistent threat Arbitrary code execution Backdoors Bombs Fork Logic Time Zip Hardware backdoors Code injection Crimeware Crosssite scripting Crosssite leaks DOM clobbering History sniffing Cryptojacking Botnets Data breach Driveby download Browser Helper Objects Viruses Data scraping Denialofservice attack Eavesdropping Email fraud Email spoofing Exploits Fraudulent dialers Hacktivism Infostealer Insecure direct object reference Keystroke loggers Malware Payload Phishing Voice Polymorphic engine Privilege escalation Ransomware Rootkits Scareware Shellcode Spamming Social engineering Spyware Software bugs Trojan horses Hardware Trojans Remote access trojans Vulnerability Web shells Wiper Worms SQL injection Rogue security software Zombie Defenses Application security Secure coding Secure by default Secure by design Misuse case Computer access control Authentication Multifactor authentication Authorization Computer security software Antivirus software Securityfocused operating system Datacentric security Obfuscation software Data masking Encryption Firewall Intrusion detection system Hostbased intrusion detection system HIDS Anomaly detection Information security management Information risk management Security information and event management SIEM Runtime application selfprotection Site isolation v t e Malware topics Infectious malware Comparison of computer viruses Computer virus Computer worm List of computer worms Timeline of computer viruses and worms Concealment Backdoor Clickjacking Maninthebrowser Maninthemiddle Rootkit Trojan horse Zombie computer Malware for profit Adware Botnet Crimeware Fleeceware Form grabbing Fraudulent dialer Infostealer Keystroke logging Malbot Privacyinvasive software Ransomware Rogue security software Scareware Spyware Web threats By operating system Android malware Classic Mac OS viruses iOS malware Linux malware MacOS malware Macro virus Mobile malware Palm OS viruses HyperCard viruses Protection Antikeylogger Antivirus software Browser security Data loss prevention software Defensive computing Firewall Internet security Intrusion detection system Mobile security Network security Countermeasures Computer and network surveillance Honeypot Operation Bot Roast v t e Software distribution Licenses Beerware Floating licensing Free and opensource Free Open source Freely redistributable Licensefree Proprietary Public domain Sourceavailable Compensation models Adware Commercial software Retail software Crippleware Crowdfunding Freemium Freeware Pay what you want Careware Donationware Opencore model Postcardware Shareware Nagware Trialware Delivery methods Digital distribution File sharing Onpremises Preinstalled Product bundling Retail software Sneakernet Software as a service Deceptive andor illicit Unwanted software bundling Malware Infostealer Ransomware Spyware Trojan horse Worm Scareware Shovelware Software release life cycle Abandonware Endoflife Longterm support Software maintenance Software maintainer Software publisher Vaporware list Copy protection Digital rights management Software protection dongle License manager Product activation Product key Software copyright Software license server Software patent Torrent poisoning Authority control databases  National Germany United States Japan Israel