Automation for various purposes of vehicles For vehicles relying completely either on automation or remote control see Uncrewed vehicle . Intelligent car redirects here. For the European Commission policy see Intelligent Car Initiative . The ESA Seeker autonomous rover during tests at Paranal  1  Automated vehicle system technology hierarchy Part of a series on Selfdriving cars  selfdriving vehicles Enablers Assured clear distance ahead Autonomous racing Datasets History Impact Lane centering Pedestrian crash avoidance mitigation Vehicle infrastructure integration Topics Automatic parking Platoon Regulation Liability Robotaxi Selfdriving truck Tunnel problem Related topics Automatic train operation Unmanned surface vehicle Vehicular automation v t e Part of a series on Automation Automation in general Banking Building Home Highway system Laboratory Library Broadcast Mix Pool cleaner Pop music Reasoning Semiautomation Telephone Attendant Switchboard Teller machine Vehicular Vending machine Robotics and robots Domestic Vacuum cleaner Roomba Lawn mower Guided vehicle Industrial Paint ODD Impact of automation Manumation OOL Bias Selfdriving cars Technological unemployment Jobless recovery Postwork society Threat Trade shows and awards ASPDAC DAC DATE IEEE Robotics and Automation Award ICCAD v t e Vehicular automation is the use of technology to assist or replace the operator of a vehicle such as a car truck aircraft rocket military vehicle or boat.  2   3   4   5   6  Assisted vehicles are semiautonomous  whereas vehicles that can travel without a human operator are autonomous .  3  The degree of autonomy may be subject to various constraints such as conditions. Autonomy is enabled by advanced driverassistance systems ADAS of varying capacity. Related technology includes advanced software maps vehicle changes and support outside the vehicle. Autonomy presents varying issues for road travel air travel and marine travel. Roads present the greatest complexity given the unpredictability of the driving environment including diverse road designs driving conditions traffic obstacles and geographicalcultural differences.  7  Autonomy implies that the vehicle is responsible for all perception monitoring and control functions.  8  SAE autonomy levels  edit  Main article Selfdriving car  Classifications Further information Automatic train operation  Grades of automation The Society of Automotive Engineers SAE classifies road vehicle autonomy in six levels  9   10  0 No automation. 1 Driver assistance the vehicle controls steering or speed autonomously in specific circumstances. 2 Partial automation the vehicle controls both steering and speed autonomously in specific circumstances. 3 Conditional automation the vehicle controls both steering and speed under normal environmental conditions but requires the driver to be ready to take control in other circumstances. 4 High automation the vehicle travels autonomously under normal environmental conditions not requiring driver oversight. 5 Full autonomy where the vehicle can complete travel autonomously in any environmental conditions. Level 0 refers for instance to vehicles without adaptive cruise control . Level 1 and 2 refer to vehicles where one part of the driving task is performed by the ADAS under the responsibilityliability of the driver. From level 3 the driver can transfer the driving task to the vehicle but the driver must assume control when the ADAS reaches its limits. For instance an automated traffic jam pilot can drive in a traffic jam  but otherwise passes control to the driver. Level 5 refers to a vehicle that can handle any situation.  11  Technology  edit  Perception  edit  The perception system is responsible for observing the environment. It must identify everything that could affect the trip including obstacles and other issues.  12  Various makers use cameras radar  lidar  sonar  and microphones that can collaboratively minimize errors.  12  Further technological progress tends to combine several different sensors such as cameras radars laser radars etc. to work in coordination with each other. They can further improve the ability to process information actively eliminate some invalid information help make the most accurate decisions and reduce the occurrence of traffic accidents.  13  Software  edit  Autonomous systems typically rely on machine learning software to operate.  14  Navigation  edit  Navigation systems are a necessary element in autonomous vehicles. The Global Positioning System GPS is used for navigation by air and water vehicles and by land vehicles as well particularly for offroad navigation. For road vehicles two approaches are prominent. One is to use maps that hold data about lanes and intersections relying on the vehicles perception system to fill in the details. The other is to use highly detailed maps that reduce the scope of realtime decisionmaking but require significant maintenance resources as the environment evolves.  14  Some systems crowdsource their map updates using the vehicles themselves to update the map to reflect changes such as construction or traffic that is then used by the entire vehicle fleet.  15  Another potential source of information is the environment itself. Traffic data may be supplied by roadside monitoring systems and used to route vehicles to best use a limited road system.  16  History  edit  Automated vehicles in European Union legislation refer specifically to road vehicles car truck or bus.  17  For those vehicles a specific difference is legally defined between advanced driverassistance system and autonomousautomated vehicles based on liability differences. AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety tested two automatic emergency braking systems some designed to prevent crashes and others that aim to make a crash less severe. The test looked at popular models like the 2016 Volvo XC90  Subaru Legacy  Lincoln MKX  Honda Civic  and Volkswagen Passat . Researchers tested how well each system stopped when approaching moving and nonmoving targets. It found that systems capable of preventing crashes reduced vehicle speeds by twice that of the systems designed to mitigate crash severity. When the two test vehicles traveled within 30 mph of each other even those designed to simply lessen crash severity avoided crashes 60 percent of the time.  18  Sartre  edit  The SAfe Road TRains for the Environment Sartre projects goal was to enable platooning in which a line of cars and trucks a train follow a humandriven vehicle. Trains were predicted to provide comfort and allow the following vehicles to travel safely to a destination. Human drivers encountering a train could join and delegate driving to the human driver.  19  Tests  edit  Selfdriving Uber vehicles were tested in Pittsburgh Pennsylvania. The tests were paused after an autonomous car killed a woman in Arizona.  20   21  Automated busses have been tested in California.  22  In San Diego California an automated bus test used magnetic markers. The longitudinal control of automated truck platoons used millimeter wave radio and radar. Waymo and Tesla have conducted tests. Tesla FSD allows drivers to enter a destination and let the car take over. Risks and liabilities  edit  See also Computer security  Automobiles  and Autonomous car liability Ford offers Blue Cruise technology that allows geofenced cars to drive autonomously.  23  Drivers are directed to stay attentive and safety warnings are implemented to alert the driver when corrective action is needed.  24  Tesla Incorporated has one recorded incident that resulted in a fatality involving the automated driving system in the Tesla Model S.  25  The accident report reveals the accident was a result of the driver being inattentive and the autopilot system not recognizing the obstruction ahead.  25  Tesla has also had multiple instances where the vehicle crashed into a garage door. According to the book The Driver in the Driverless Car How Your Technology Choices Create the Future a Tesla performed an update overnight automatically. The morning after the update the driver used his app to summon his car it crashed into his garage door. Another flaw with automated driving systems is that in situations where unpredictable events such as weather or the driving behavior of others may cause fatal accidents due to sensors that monitor the surroundings of the vehicle not being able to provide corrective action.  24  To overcome some of the challenges for automated driving systems novel methodologies based on virtual testing traffic flow simulation and digital prototypes have been proposed  26  especially when novel algorithms based on Artificial Intelligence approaches are employed which require extensive training and validation data sets. The implementation of automated driving systems poses the possibility of changing built environments in urban areas such as the expansion of suburban areas due to the increased ease of mobility.  27  Challenges  edit  Around 2015 several selfdriving car companies including Nissan and Toyota promised selfdriving cars by 2020. However the predictions turned out to be far too optimistic.  28  There are still many obstacles in developing fully autonomous Level 5 vehicles which is the ability to operate in any conditions. Currently companies are focused on Level 4 automation which is able to operate under certain environmental circumstances.  28  There is still debate about what an autonomous vehicle should look like. For example whether to incorporate lidar to autonomous driving systems is still being argued. Some researchers have come up with algorithms using cameraonly data that achieve the performance that rival those of lidar. On the other hand cameraonly data sometimes draw inaccurate bounding boxes and thus lead to poor predictions. This is due to the nature of superficial information that stereo cameras provide whereas incorporating lidar gives autonomous vehicles precise distance to each point on the vehicle.  28  Technical challenges  edit  Software Integration Because of the large number of sensors and safety processes required by autonomous vehicles software integration remains a challenging task. A robust autonomous vehicle should ensure that the integration of hardware and software can recover from component failures.  29  Prediction and trust among autonomous vehicles Fully autonomous cars should be able to anticipate the actions of other cars like humans do. Human drivers are great at predicting other drivers behaviors even with a small amount of data such as eye contact or hand gestures. In the first place the cars should agree on traffic rules whose turn it is to drive in an intersection and so on. This scales into a larger issue when there exists both humanoperated cars and selfdriving cars due to more uncertainties. A robust autonomous vehicle is expected to improve on understanding the environment better to address this issue.  29  Scaling up The coverage of autonomous vehicles testing could not be accurate enough. In cases where heavy traffic and obstruction exist it requires faster response time or better tracking algorithms from the autonomous vehicles. In cases where unseen objects are encountered it is important that the algorithms are able to track these objects and avoid collisions.  29  These features require numerous sensors many of which rely on microelectromechanical systems MEMS to maintain a small size high efficiency and low cost. Foremost among MEMS sensors in vehicles are accelerometers and gyroscopes to measure acceleration around multiple orthogonal axescritical to detecting and controlling the vehicles motion. Societal challenges  edit  One critical step to achieve the implementation of autonomous vehicles is the acceptance by the general public. It provides guidelines for the automobile industry to improve their design and technology. Studies have shown that many people believe that using autonomous vehicles is safer which underlines the necessity for the automobile companies to assure that autonomous vehicles improve safety benefits. The TAM research model breaks down important factors that affect the consumers acceptance into usefulness ease to use trust and social influence.  30  The usefulness factor studies whether or not autonomous vehicles are useful in that they provide benefits that save consumers time and make their lives simpler. How well the consumers believe autonomous vehicles will be useful compared to other forms of transportation solutions is a determining factor.  30  The ease to use factor studies the userfriendliness of the autonomous vehicles. While the notion that consumers care more about ease to use than safety has been challenged. It still remains an important factor that has indirect effects on the publics intention to use autonomous vehicles.  30  The trust factor studies the safety data privacy and security protection of autonomous vehicles. A more trusted system has a positive impact on the consumers decision to use autonomous vehicles.  30  The social influence factor studies whether the influence of others would influence consumers likelihood of having autonomous vehicles. Studies have shown that the social influence factor is positively related to behavioral intention. This might be due to the fact that cars traditionally serve as a status symbol that represents ones intent to use and his social environment.  30  Regulatory challenges  edit  See also Regulation of selfdriving cars Realtime testing of autonomous vehicles is an inevitable part of the process. At the same time vehicular automation regulators are faced with challenges to protect public safety and yet allow autonomous vehicle companies to test their products. Groups representing autonomous vehicle companies are resisting most regulations whereas groups representing vulnerable road users and traffic safety are pushing for regulatory barriers. To improve traffic safety the regulators are encouraged to find a middle ground that protects the public from immature technology while allowing autonomous vehicle companies to test the implementation of their systems.  31  There have also been proposals to adopt the aviation automation safety regulatory knowledge into the discussions of safe implementation of autonomous vehicles due to the experience that has been gained over the decades by the aviation sector on safety topics.  32  Ground vehicles  edit  Further information Unmanned ground vehicle In some countries specific laws and regulations apply to road traffic motor vehicles such as cars bus and trucks while other laws and regulations apply to other ground vehicles such as tram train or automated guided vehicles making them to operate in different environments and conditions. Road traffic vehicles  edit  An automated driving system is defined in a proposed amendment to Article 1 of the Vienna Convention on Road Traffic  ab  Automated driving system  refers to a vehicle system that uses both hardware and
software to exercise dynamic control of a vehicle on a sustained basis. ac Dynamic control refers to carrying out all the realtime operational and tactical functions required to move the vehicle. This includes controlling the vehicles lateral and longitudinal motion monitoring the road environment responding to events in the road traffic environment and planning and signalling for manoeuvres.  33  This amendment will enter into force on 14 July 2022 unless it is rejected before 13 January 2022.  34  An automated driving feature must be described sufficiently clearly so that it is distinguished from an assisted driving feature.  SMMT  35  There are two clear states  a vehicle is either assisted with a driver being supported by technology or automated where the technology is effectively and safely replacing the driver.  SMMT  35  Ground vehicles employing automation and teleoperation include shipyard gantries mining trucks bombdisposal robots robotic insects and driverless tractors . There are many autonomous and semiautonomous ground vehicles being made for the purpose of transporting passengers. One such example is the freeranging on grid  FROG  technology which consists of autonomous vehicles a magnetic track and a supervisory system. The FROG system is deployed for industrial purposes in factory sites and has been in use since 1999 on the ParkShuttle  a PRT style public transport system in the city of Capelle aan den IJssel to connect the Rivium business park with the neighboring city of Rotterdam where the route terminates at the Kralingse Zoom metro station. The system experienced a crash in 2005  36  that proved to be caused by a human error.  37  Applications for automation in ground vehicles include the following Vehicle tracking system system ESITrack Lojack . Rearview alarm to detect obstacles behind. Antilock braking system ABS also Emergency Braking Assistance  EBA  often coupled with Electronic brake force distribution EBD which prevents the brakes from locking and losing traction while braking. This shortens stopping distances in most cases and more importantly allows the driver to steer the vehicle while braking. Traction control system TCS actuates brakes or reduces throttle to restore traction if driven wheels begin to spin. Four wheel drive AWD with a centre differential. Distributing power to all four wheels lessens the chances of wheel spin. It also suffers less from oversteer and understeer . Electronic Stability Control ESC also known for MercedesBenz proprietary Electronic Stability Program ESP Acceleration Slip Regulation ASR and Electronic differential lock EDL. Uses various sensors to intervene when the car senses a possible loss of control. The cars control unit can reduce power from the engine and even apply the brakes on individual wheels to prevent the car from understeering or oversteering . Dynamic steering response DSR corrects the rate of power steering system to adapt it to vehicles speed and road conditions. Research is ongoing and prototypes of autonomous ground vehicles exist. Cars  edit  See also Selfdriving car Extensive automation for cars focuses on either introducing robotic cars or modifying modern car designs to be semiautonomous. Semiautonomous designs could be implemented sooner as they rely less on technology that is still at the forefront of research. An example is the dual mode monorail. Groups such as RUF Denmark and TriTrack USA are working on projects consisting of specialized private cars that are driven manually on normal roads but also that dock onto a monorailguideway along which they are driven autonomously. As a method of automating cars without extensively modifying the cars as much as a robotic car  Automated highway systems AHS aims to construct lanes on highways that would be equipped with for example magnets to guide the vehicles. Automation vehicles have autobrakes named as Auto Vehicles Braking System AVBS. Highway computers would manage the traffic and direct the cars to avoid crashes. In 2006 The European Commission has established a smart car development program called the Intelligent Car Flagship Initiative .  38  The goals of that program include Adaptive cruise control Lane departure warning system Project AWAKE for drowsy drivers There are further uses for automation in relation to cars. These include Assured Clear Distance Ahead Adaptive headlamps Advanced Automatic Collision Notification  such as OnStar Intelligent Parking Assist System Automatic Parking Automotive night vision with pedestrian detection Blind spot monitoring Driver Monitoring System Robotic car or selfdriving car which may result in lessstressed drivers higher efficiency the driver can do something else increased safety and less pollution e.g. via completely automated fuel control Precrash system Safe speed governing Traffic sign recognition Following another car on a motorway  enhanced or adaptive cruise control as used by Ford Motor Company and Vauxhall  39  Distance control assist  as developed by Nissan  40  Dead mans switch  there is a move to introduce deadmans braking into automotive application primarily heavy vehicles and there may also be a need to add penalty switches to cruise controls . Singapore also announced a set of provisional national standards on January 31 2019 to guide the autonomous vehicle industry. The standards known as Technical Reference 68 TR68 will promote the safe deployment of fully driverless vehicles in Singapore according to a joint press release by Enterprise Singapore ESG Land Transport Authority LTA Standards Development Organisation and Singapore Standards Council SSC.  41  Shuttle  edit  Parkshuttle Navya Autonom Shuttle Easymile EZ10 King Long Apolong Since 1999 the 12seat10standing ParkShuttle has been operating on an 1.8 kilometres 1.1 mi exclusive right of way in the city of Capelle aan den IJssel in The Netherlands. The system uses small magnets in the road surface to allow the vehicle to determine its position. The use of shared autonomous vehicles was trialed around 2012 in a hospital car park in Portugal.  42  From 2012 to 2016 the European Union funded CityMobil2 project examined the use of shared autonomous vehicles and passenger experience including short term trials in seven cities. This project led to the development of the EasyMile EZ10.  43  In the 2010s selfdriving shuttle became able to run in mixed traffic without the need for embedded guidance markers.  44  So far the focus has been on low speed 20 miles per hour 32 kmh with short fixed routes for the last mile of journeys. This means issues of collision avoidance and safety are significantly less challenging than those for automated cars which seek to match the performance of conventional vehicles. Many trials have been undertaken mainly on quiet roads with little traffic or on public pathways or private roadways and specialised test sites.  citation needed  The capacity of different models varies significantly between 6seats and 20seats. Above this size there are conventional buses that have driverless technology installed. In December 2016 the Jacksonville Transportation Authority has announced its intention to replace the Jacksonville Skyway monorail with driverless vehicles that would run on the existing elevated superstructure as well as continue onto ordinary roads.  45  The project has since been named the Ultimate Urban Circulator or U2C and testing has been carried out on shuttles from six different manufacturers. The cost of the project is estimated at 379 million.  46  In January 2017 it was announced the ParkShuttle system in the Netherlands will be renewed and expanded including extending the route network beyond the exclusive right of way so vehicles will run in mixed traffic on ordinary roads.  47  The plans were delayed and the extension into mixed traffic was expected in 2021.  48  In July 2018 Baidu stated it had built 100 of its 8seat Apolong model with plans for commercial sales.  49  As of July 2021 they had not gone into volume production. In August 2020 it was reported there were 25 autonomous shuttle manufacturers  50  including the 2GetThere  Local Motors  Navya  Baidu  Easymile  Toyota and Ohmio. In December 2020 Toyota showcased its 20passenger ePalette vehicle which is due to be used at the 2021 Tokyo Olympic Games .  51  Toyota announced it intends to have the vehicle available for commercial applications before 2025.  52  In January 2021 Navya released an investor report which predicted global autonomous shuttle sales will reach 12600 units by 2025 with a market value of EUR 1.7 billion.  53  In June 2021 Chinese maker Yutong claimed to have delivered 100 models of its 10seat Xiaoyu 2.0 autonomous bus for use in Zhengzhou . Testing has been carried out in a number of cities since 2019 with trials open to the public planned for July 2021.  54  Selfdriving shuttles are already in use on some private roads such as at the Yutong factory in Zhengzhou where they are used to transport workers between buildings of the worlds largest bus factory.  55  Trials  edit  A large number of trials have been conducted since 2016 with most involving only one vehicle on a short route for a short period of time and with an onboard conductor. The purpose of the trials has been to both provide technical data and to familiarize the public with the driverless technology. A 2021 survey of over 100 shuttle experiments across Europe concluded that low speed  1520 kilometres per hour 9.312.4 mph  was the major barrier to implementation of autonomous shuttle buses. The current cost of the vehicles at 280000 and the need for onboard attendants were also issues.  56  This list is incomplete  you can help by adding missing items .  April 2023  CompanyLocation Details Navya Arma in Neuhausen am Rheinfall In October 2016 BestMile started trials in Neuhausen am Rheinfall  claiming to be the worlds first solution for managing hybrid fleets with both autonomous and nonautonomous vehicles.  57  The test ended in October 2021.  58  Local Motors Olli At the end of 2016 the Olli was tested in Washington D.C.  59  In 2020 a fourmonth trial was undertaken at the United Nations ITCILO campus in Turin Italy to provide transport shuttle to employees and guests within the campus.  60  Navya Autonom Navya claimed in May 2017 to have carried almost 150000 passengers across Europe  61  with trials in Sion  Cologne  Doha  Bordeaux and the nuclear power plant at Civaux as well as Las Vegas  62  and Perth .  63  Ongoing public trials are underway in Lyon  Val Thorens and Masdar City . Other trials on private sites are underway at University of Michigan since 2016  64  at Salford University and the Fukushima Daini Nuclear Power Plant since 2018.  65  Texas AM In August 2017 a driverless four seat shuttle was trialed at Texas AM university as part of its Transportation Technology Initiative in a project run by academics and students on the campus.  66   67  Another trial this time using Navya vehicles was run in 2019 from September to November.  68  RDM Group  LUTZ Pathfinder  In October 2017 RDM Group began a trial service with two seat vehicles between Trumpington Park and Ride and Cambridge railway station along the guided busway for possible use as an after hours service once the regular bus service has stopped each day.  69  EasyMile EZ10 EasyMile has had longer term trials at Wageningen University and Lausanne as well as short trials in Darwin   70  Dubai  Helsinki  San Sebastian  Sophia Antipolis  Bordeaux  71  and Tapei  72  In December 2017 a trial began in Denver running at 5 miles per hour 8.0 kmh on a dedicated stretch of road.  73  EasyMile was operating in ten U.S. states including California Florida Texas Ohio Utah and Virginia before U.S. service was suspended after a February 2020 injury.  74  In August 2020 EasyMile was operating shuttles in 16 cities across the United States including Salt Lake City  Columbus Ohio and Corpus Christi Texas.  75  In October 2020 a new trial was launched in Fairfax Virginia.  76  In August 2021 a oneyear trial was launched at the Colorado School of Mines in Golden Colorado. The trial uses nine vehicles with seven active at any time and provides a 510 minute service along three routes at a maximum speed of 12 mph 19 kmh. At the time of launch this was the largest such trial in the United States.  77   78  In November 2021 EasyMile became the first driverless solutions provider in Europe authorized to operate at Level 4 in mixed traffic on a public road. EZ10 has been making test runs on a medical campus in the southwestern city of Toulouse since March.  79   80  Westfield Autonomous Vehicles POD In 2017 and 2018 using a modified version of the UltraPRT called POD four vehicles were used as part of the GATEway project trial conducted in Greenwich in south London on a 3.4 kilometres 2.1 mi route.  81  A number of other trials have been conducted in Birmingham Manchester Lake District National Park University of the West of England and Filton Airfield.  82  Next Future Transportation pods in Dubai In February 2018 the ten passenger six seated 12 miles per hour 19 kmh autonomous pods which are capable of joining to form a bus were demonstrated at the World Government Summit in Dubai. The demonstration was a collaboration with between NextFuture and Dubais Roads and Transport Authority and the vehicles are under consideration for deployment there.  83  ApolongApollo In July 2018 a driverless eight seater shuttle bus was trialed at the 2018 Shanghai expo after tests in Xiamen and Chongqing cities as part of Project Apollo a massproduced autonomous vehicle project launched by a consortium including Baidu .  84   85   86  Jacksonville Transportation Authority Since December 2018 the Jacksonville Transportation Authority has been using a test and learn site at the Florida State College at Jacksonville  87  to evaluate vehicles from different vendors as part of its plan for the Ultimate Urban Circulator U 2 C. Among the six vehicles tested  88  are the Local Motors Olli 2.0  89  Navya Autonom  90  and EasyMile EZ10 .  91  2getthere  ParkShuttle  in Brussels In 2019 trials were held at Brussels Airport  92  and at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore.  93  Ohmio Lift in Christchurch In 2019 Trials with their 15person shuttle were conducted in New Zealand at Christchurch Airport  94  and at the Christchurch Botanic Gardens  95  in 2020. Yutong Xioayu Testing with the first generation vehicle in 2019 at the Boao Forum for Asia and in Zhengzhou .  96  The 10seat second generation vehicle has been delivered to Guangzhou Nanjing Zhengzhou Sansha Changsha with public trials due to commence in July 2021 in Zhengzhou .  54   97  ARTC WinBus in Changhua city In July 2020 a trial service began in Changhua city in Taiwan connecting four tourism factories in Changhua Coastal Industrial Park along a 7.5 km 4.7 mi with plans to extend the route to 12.6 km 7.8 mi to serve tourist destinations.  98  In January 2021 Level 4 WinBus got a license for oneyear experimental sandbox operation.  99  Yamaha Motor Land Car based ZEN drive Pilot in Eiheiji town  Fukui prefecture  Japan In December 2020 Eiheiji town started test operation of driverless autonomous driving mobility services by making use of a remotelyoperated autonomous driving system.  100  AIST HumanCentered Mobility Research Center modified Yamaha Motors electric Land Car and the tracing road of an abandoned Eiheiji railway line. This system was legally approved as Level 3.  101  In March 2023 ZEN drive Pilot became the first legally approved Level 4 Automatic operation device under the amended Road Traffic Act of 2023.  102  WeRide Mini Robobus In January 2021 WeRide began testing its Mini Robobus on Guangzhou International Bio Island .  103  In June 2021 the company also launched trials at Nanjing. Toyota ePalette in Chūō Tokyo During the 2021 Tokyo Summer Olympics  a fleet of 20 vehicles was used to ferry athletes and others around the Athletes Village. Each vehicle could carry 20 people or 4 wheelchairs and had a top speed of 20 mph 32 kmh.  104  The event also used 200 driver operated variants called the Accessible People Movers APM  to take athletes to their events. On August 27 2021 Toyota suspended all ePallete services at the Paralympics after a vehicle collided with and injured a visually impaired pedestrian  105  and restarted on August 31 with improved safety measures.  106  Hino Poncho Long tuned by Nippon Mobility in Shinjuku  Tokyo In November 2021 Tokyo Metropolitan Government started three trials. As one of the three a lead contractor Keio Dentetsu Bus was planned to operate in the central area of the megalopolis .  107  Vehicle names are in quotes Buses  edit  The United Kingdoms first autonomous bus currently on trial with Stagecoach Manchester Autonomous buses are proposed as well as self driving cars and trucks. Grade 2 level automated minibuses were trialed for a few weeks in Stockholm.  108   109  China has a small fleet of selfdriving public buses in the tech district of Shenzhen Guangdong.  110  The first autonomous bus trial in the United Kingdom commenced in mid2019 with an Alexander Dennis Enviro200 MMC singledecker bus modified with autonomous software from Fusion Processing able to operate in driverless mode within Stagecoach Manchester s Sharston bus depot performing tasks such as driving to the washing station refuelling point and then parking at a dedicated parking space in the depot.  111  Passengercarrying driverless bus trials in Scotland commenced in January 2023 with a fleet of five identical vehicles to the Manchester trial used on a 14 miles 23 km Stagecoach Fife parkandride route across the Forth Road Bridge  from the north bank of the Forth to Edinburgh Park station .  112   113  Another autonomous trial in Oxfordshire  England which uses a battery electric Fiat Ducato minibus on a circular service to Milton Park  operated by FirstBus with support from Fusion Processing Oxfordshire County Council and the University of the West of England  entered full passenger service also in January 2023. The trial route is planned to be extended to Didcot Parkway railway station following the acquisition of a larger singledecker by the end of 2023.  114   115  In July 2020 in Japan AIST HumanCentered Mobility Research Center with Nippon Koei and Isuzu started a series of demonstration tests for midsized buses Isuzu Erga Mio with autonomous driving systems in five areas Ōtsu city in Shiga prefecture  Sanda city in Hyōgo Prefecture and other three areas in sequence.  116   117   118  In October 2023 Imagry  an Israeli AI startup introduced its mapless autonomous driving solution at Busworld Europe leveraging a realtime image recognition system and a spatial deep convolutional neural network DCNN to mimic human driving behavior.  119  Trucks  edit  Further information Selfdriving truck The concept for autonomous vehicles has been applied for commercial uses such as autonomous or nearly autonomous trucks . Companies such as Suncor Energy  a Canadian energy company and Rio Tinto Group were among the first to replace humanoperated trucks with driverless commercial trucks run by computers.  120  In April 2016 trucks from major manufacturers including Volvo and the Daimler Company completed a week of autonomous driving across Europe organized by the Dutch in an effort to get selfdriving trucks on the road. With developments in selfdriving trucks progressing U.S. selfdriving truck sales is expected to reach 60000 by 2035 according to a report released by IHS Incorporated in June 2016.  121  As reported in June 1995 in Popular Science magazine selfdriving trucks were being developed for combat convoys whereby only the lead truck would be driven by a human and the following trucks would rely on satellite an inertial guidance system and groundspeed sensors.  122  Caterpillar Incorporated made early developments in 2013 with the Robotics Institute at Carnegie Mellon University to improve efficiency and reduce cost at various mining and construction sites.  123  In Europe the Safe Road Trains for the Environment is such an approach. From PWCs Strategy  Report  124  self driving trucks will be the source of concern around how this technology will impact around 3 million truck drivers in the US as well as 4 million employees in support of the trucking economy in gas stations restaurants bars and hotels. At the same time some companies like Starsky are aiming for Level 3 Autonomy which would see the driver playing a control role around the trucks environment. The companys project remote truck driving would give truck drivers a greater worklife balance enabling them to avoid long periods away from their home. This would however provoke a potential mismatch between the drivers skills with the technological redefinition of the job. Companies that buy driverless trucks could massively cut costs human drivers would no longer be required companies liabilities due to truck accidents would diminish and productivity would increase as the driverless truck doesnt need to rest. The usage of self driving trucks will go hand in hand with the use of realtime data to optimize both efficiency and productivity of the service delivered as a way to tackle traffic congestion for example. Driverless trucks could enable new business models that would see deliveries shift from day time to night time or time slots in which traffic is less heavily dense. Suppliers  edit  Company Details Waymo Semi In March 2018 Waymo  the automated vehicle company spun off from Google parent company Alphabet Incorporated  announced it was applying its technology to semi trucks. In the announcement Waymo noted it would be using automated trucks to move freight related to Googles data centers in the Atlanta  Georgia area. The trucks will be manned and operated on public roads.  125  Uber Semi In October 2016 Uber completed the first driverless operation of an automated truck on public roads delivering a trailer of Budweiser beer from Fort Collins Colorado to Colorado Springs.  126  The run was completed at night on Interstate 25 after extensive testing and system improvements in cooperation with the Colorado State Police. The truck had a human in the cab but not sitting in the drivers seat while the Colorado State Police provided a rolling closure of the highway.  127  At the time Ubers automated truck was based primarily on technology developed by Otto  which Uber acquired in August 2016.  128  In March 2018 Uber announced it was using its automated trucks to deliver freight in Arizona while also leveraging the UberFreight app to find and dispatch loads.  129  Embark Semi In February 2018 Embark Trucks announced it had completed the first crosscountry trip of an automated semi driving 2400 miles from Los Angeles California to Jacksonville Florida on Interstate 10.  130  This followed a November 2017 announcement that it had partnered with Electrolux and Ryder to test its automated truck by moving Frigidaire refrigerators from El Paso Texas to Palm Springs California.  131  Tesla Semi In November 2017 Tesla Incorporated  owned by Elon Musk  revealed a prototype of the Tesla Semi and announced that it would go into production. This longhaul electric semitruck can drive itself and move in  platoons  that automatically follow a lead vehicle. It was disclosed in August 2017 that it sought permission to test the vehicles in Nevada .  132  Starsky Robotics In 2017 Starsky Robotics unveiled its technology that allows to make trucks autonomous. Unlike its bigger competitors in this industry that aims to tackle Level 4 and 5 Autonomy Starsky Robotics is aiming at producing Level 3 Autonomy trucks in which the human drivers should be prepared to respond to a request to intervene in case anything goes wrong. Pronto AI In December 2018 Anthony Levandowski unveiled his new autonomous driving company Pronto which is building L2 ADAS technology for the commercial trucking industry. The company is based in San Francisco California.  133  Motorcycles  edit  Several selfbalancing autonomous motorcycles were demonstrated in 2017 and 2018 from BMW Honda and Yamaha.  134   135   136  This list is incomplete  you can help by adding missing items .  June 2021  CompanyLocation Details Honda motorcycle Inspired by the Unicub Honda implemented a selfbalancing technology into their motorcycles. Due to the weight of motorcycles it is often a challenge for motorcycle owners to keep balance of their vehicles at low speeds or at a stop. Hondas motorcycle concept has a selfbalancing feature that will keep the vehicle upright. It automatically lowers the center of balance by extending the wheelbase. It then takes control of the steering to keep the vehicle balanced. This allows users to navigate the vehicle more easily when walking or driving in stop and go traffic. However this system is not for high speed driving.  134   137  BMWs Motorrad Vision concept motorcycle BMW Motorrad developed the ConnectRide self driving motorcycle in order to push the boundaries of motorcycle safety. The autonomous features of the motorcycle include emergency braking negotiating intersections assisting during tight turns and front impact avoidance. These are features similar to current technologies that are being developed and implemented in autonomous cars. This motorcycle can also fully drive on its own at normal driving speed making turns and returning to a designated location. It lacks the self standing feature that Honda has implemented.  138  Yamahas riderless motorcycle Motoroid can hold its balance autonomously driving recognizing riders and go to a designated location with a hand gesture. Yamaha used the Human beings react a hell of a lot quicker research philosophy into the motoroid. The idea is that the autonomous vehicle is not attempting to replace human beings but to augment the abilities of the human with advanced technology. They have tactile feedback such as a gentle squeeze to a riders lower back as a reassuring caress at dangerous speeds as if the vehicle was responding and communicating with the rider. Their goal is to meld the machine and human together to form one experience.  139  HarleyDavidson While their motorcycles are popular one of the largest problems of owning a HarleyDavidson is the reliability of the vehicle. It is difficult to manage the weight of the vehicle at low speeds and picking it up from the ground can be a difficult process even with correct techniques. In order to attract more customers they filed a patent for having a gyroscope at the back of the vehicle that will keep the balance of the motorcycle for the rider at low speeds. After 3 miles per hour the system disengages. However anything below that the gyroscope can handle the balance of the vehicle which means it can balance even at a stop. This system can be removed if the rider feels ready without it meaning it is modular.  137  Trains  edit  Main article Automatic train operation The concept for autonomous vehicles has also been applied for commercial uses like for autonomous trains. The worlds first driverless urban transit system is the Port Island Line in Kobe  Japan opened in 1981.  140  The first selfdriving train in the UK was launched in London on the Thameslink route.  141  An example of an automated train network is the Docklands Light Railway in London . Also see List of automated train systems . Trams  edit  In 2018 the first autonomous trams in Potsdam were trialed.  142  Automated guided vehicle  edit  Main article Automated guided vehicle An automated guided vehicle or automatic guided vehicle AGV is a mobile robot that follows markers or wires in the floor or uses vision magnets or lasers for navigation. They are most often used in industrial applications to move materials around a manufacturing facility or warehouse. Application of the automatic guided vehicle had broadened during the late 20th century. Aircraft  edit  Main article Unmanned aerial vehicle Aircraft have received much attention for automation especially for navigation. A system capable of autonomously navigating a vehicle especially aircraft is known as autopilot . Delivery drones  edit  Main article Delivery drone Various industries such as packages and food have experimented with delivery drones. Traditional and new transportation companies are competing in the market. For example UPS Flight Forward  Alphabet Wing and Amazon Prime Air are all developing delivery drones.  143  Zipline  an American medical drone delivery company has the largest active drone delivery operations in the world and its drones are capable of Level 4 autonomy.  144  However even if technology seems to allow for those solutions to function correctly as various tests of various companies show the main throwback to the market launch and use of such drones is inevitably the legislation in place and regulatory agencies have to decide on the framework they wish to take to draft regulation. This process is in different phases across the world as each country will tackle the topic independently. For example Icelands government and departments of transport aviation police have already started issuing licenses for drone operations. It has a permissive approach and together with Costa Rica Italy the UAE Sweden and Norway has a fairly unrestricted legislation on commercial drone use. Those countries are characterized by a body of regulation that may give operational guidelines or require licensing registration and insurance.  145  On the other side other countries have decided to ban either directly outright ban or indirectly effective ban the use of commercial drones. The RAND Corporation thus notes the difference between countries forbidding drones and those that have a formal process for commercial drone licensing but requirements are either impossible to meet or licenses do not appear to have been approved. In the US United Parcel Service is the only delivery service with the Part 135 Standard certification that is required to use drones to deliver to real customers.  143  However most countries seem to be struggling on the integration of drones for commercial uses into their aviation regulatory frameworks. Thus constraints are placed on the use of those drones such as that they must be operating within the visual line of sight VLOS of the pilot and thus limiting their potential range. This would be the case of the Netherlands and Belgium. Most countries let pilots operate outside the VLOS but is subject to restrictions and pilot ratings which would be the case of the US. The general trend is that legislation is moving fast and laws are constantly being reevaluated. Countries are moving towards a more permissive approach but the industry still lacks infrastructures to ensure the success of such a transition. To provide safety and efficiency specialized training courses pilot exams type of UAV and flying conditions as well as liability management measures regarding insurances may need to be developed. There is a sense of urgency related to this innovation as competition is high and companies lobby to integrate them rapidly in their products and services offerings. Since June 2017 the US Senate legislation reauthorized the Federal Aviation Administration and the Department of Transportation to create a carrier certificate allowing for package deliveries by drones.  146  Watercraft  edit  Main article Unmanned surface vehicle Autonomous boats can provide security perform research or conduct hazardous or repetitive tasks such as guiding a large ship into a harbor or transporting cargo. Sea Machines  edit  Sea Machines offers an autonomous system for workboats. While it requires a human operator to oversee its actions the system takes care of many active domain perception and navigation duties that normally a few members of the crew would have to do. They use AI to have situational awareness for different ships within the route. They use camera lidar and proprietary software to inform the operator of its status.  147   148  Buffalo Automation  edit  Buffalo Automation  a team formed from the University of Buffalo creates technology for semiautonomous features for boats. They started by creating navigation assist technologies for freighters called AutoMate which is like having another very experienced first mate that will look out for the ship.  149  The system helps navigate difficult waterways.  148   150  Autonomous Marine Systems  edit  This Massachusetts based company has led the forefront of unmanned sailing drones. The Datamarans are autonomously sailing to collect ocean data. They are created to enable large payload packages. Due to the automated system and their solar panels they are able to navigate for longer periods of time. Their technologies on advanced metocean surveys collect wind velocity profiles with altitude water current conductivity temperature profiles with depth hiresolution bathymetry subbottom profiling and magnetometer measurements.  151   148  Mayflower  edit  The autonomous vessel called Mayflower is expected to be the first large ship that makes an unmanned transatlantic journey.  152  Saildrones  edit  This autonomous unmanned vessel uses both solar and wind energy to navigate.  153  DARPA  edit  Sea Hunter is an autonomous unmanned surface vehicle USV launched in 2016 as part of the DARPA AntiSubmarine Warfare Continuous Trail Unmanned Vessel  ACTUV  program. Submersibles  edit  Main article Autonomous underwater vehicle Underwater vehicles have been a focus for automation for tasks such as pipeline inspection and underwater mapping. Assistance robots  edit  Spot  edit  This fourlegged robot was created to be able to navigate through many different terrain outdoors and indoors. It can walk on its own without colliding into anything. It uses many different sensors including 360degree vision cameras and gyroscopes. It is able to keep its balance even when pushed over. This vehicle while it is not intended to be ridden can carry heavy loads for construction workers or military personnel through rough terrain.  154  Regulation  edit  See also Regulation of selfdriving cars The British Highway Code states that By selfdriving vehicles  we mean those listed as automated vehicles by the Secretary of State for Transport under the Automated and Electric Vehicles Act 2018.  The Highway Code  27072022 p. 4 The UK considers the way to update its British Highway Code for automated code Automated vehicles can perform all the tasks involved in driving in at least some situations. They differ from vehicles fitted with assisted driving features like cruise control and lanekeeping assistance  which carry out some tasks but where the driver is still responsible for driving. If you are driving a vehicle with assisted driving features you MUST stay in control of the vehicle.  proposed changes to The Highway Code  155  If the vehicle is designed to require you to resume driving after being prompted to while the vehicle is driving itself you MUST remain in a position to be able to take control. For example you should not move out of the driving seat. You should not be so distracted that you cannot take back control when prompted by the vehicle.  proposed changes to The Highway Code  155  Concerns  edit  Lack of control  edit  Through the autonomy level it is shown that the higher the level of autonomy the less control humans have on their vehicles highest level of autonomy needing zero human interventions. One concerns regarding the development of vehicular automation is related to the endusers trust in the technology that controls automated vehicles.  156  According to a nationally conducted survey made by Kelley Blue Book KBB in 2016 it was shown that the majority of people would choose to have a certain level of control behind their own vehicle rather than having the vehicle operate in Level 5 autonomy or in other words complete autonomy.  157  According to half of the respondents the idea of safety in an autonomous vehicle diminishes as the level of autonomy increases.  157  This distrust of autonomous driving systems proved to be unchanged throughout the years when a nationwide survey conducted by AAA Foundation for Traffic and Safety AAAFTS in 2019 showed the same outcome as the survey KBB did in 2016. AAAFTS survey showed that even though people have a certain level of trust in automated vehicles most people also have doubts and distrust towards the technology used in autonomous vehicles with most distrust in Level 5 autonomous vehicles.  158  It is shown by AAAFTS survey that peoples trust in autonomous driving systems increased when their level of understanding increased.  158  Malfunctions  edit  A prototype of an autonomous Uber car being tested in San Francisco California The possibility of autonomous vehicles technology to experience malfunctions is also one of the causes of users distrust in autonomous driving systems.  156  It is the concern that most respondents voted for in the AAAFTS survey.  158  Even though autonomous vehicles are made to improve traffic safety by minimizing crashes and their severity  158  they still caused fatalities. At least 113 autonomous vehicle related accidents have occurred until 2018.  159  In 2015 Google declared that their automated vehicles experienced at least 272 failures and drivers had to intervene around 13 times to prevent fatalities.  160  Furthermore other automated vehicles manufacturers also reported automated vehicles failures including the Uber car incident.  160  A selfdriving Uber car accident in 2018 is an example of autonomous vehicle accidents that are also listed among selfdriving car fatalities. A report made by the National Transportation Safety Board NTSB showed that the selfdriving Uber car was unable to identify the victim in a sufficient amount of time for the vehicle to slow down and avoid crashing into the victim.  161  Ethical  edit  Another concern related to vehicle automation is its ethical issues. In reality autonomous vehicles can encounter inevitable traffic accidents. In such situations many risks and calculations need to be made in order to minimize the amount of damage the accident could cause.  162  When a human driver encounters an inevitable accident the driver will take a spontaneous action based on ethical and moral logic. However when a driver has no control over the vehicle Level 5 autonomy the system of an autonomous vehicle needs to make that quick decision.  162  Unlike humans autonomous vehicles can only make decisions based on what it is programmed to do.  162  However the situation and circumstances of accidents differ from one another and any one decision might not be the best decision for certain accidents. Based on two research studies in 2019  163   164  the implementation of fully automated vehicles in traffic where semiautomated and nonautomated vehicles are still present might lead to complications.  163  Some flaws that still need consideration include the structure of liability distribution of responsibilities  164  efficiency in decision making and the performance of autonomous vehicles with its diverse surroundings.  163  Still researchers Steven Umbrello and Roman V. Yampolskiy propose that the value sensitive design approach is one method that can be used to design autonomous vehicles to avoid some of these ethical issues and design for human values.  165  See also  edit  Selfdriving car Selfdriving truck Dashcam Intelligent speed adaptation Intelligent Transportation System RoboTaxi Transit media Uncrewed vehicle References  edit   Selfsteering Mars Rover tested at ESOs Paranal Observatory . ESO Announcement . Retrieved 21 June 2012 .  Hu Junyan Bhowmick Parijat Lanzon Alexander August 2021. Group Coordinated Control of Networked Mobile Robots With Applications to Object Transportation . IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology . 70 8 8269 8274. doi  10.1109TVT.2021.3093157 . ISSN 00189545 .  a b Hu Junyan Bhowmick Parijat Jang Inmo Arvin Farshad Lanzon Alexander December 2021. A Decentralized Cluster Formation Containment Framework for Multirobot Systems . IEEE Transactions on Robotics . 37 6 1936 1955. doi  10.1109TRO.2021.3071615 . ISSN 15523098 .  Chan ChingYao 2017. Advancements prospects and impacts of automated driving systems . International Journal of Transportation Science and Technology . 6 3 208 216. doi  10.1016j.ijtst.2017.07.008 .  Zhao Jingyuan Zhao Wenyi Deng Bo Wang Zhenghong Zhang Feng Zheng Wenxiang Cao Wanke Nan Jinrui Lian Yubo Burke Andrew F. 2024. Autonomous driving system A comprehensive survey. Expert Systems with Applications . 242  122836. doi  10.1016j.eswa.2023.122836 .  MartínezDíaz Margarita Soriguera Francesc 2018. Autonomous vehicles theoretical and practical challenges . Transportation Research Procedia . 33  275 282. doi  10.1016j.trpro.2018.10.103 . hdl  218321640 .  Hu Junyan Turgut Ali Emre Lennox Barry Arvin Farshad January 2022. Robust Formation Coordination of Robot Swarms With Nonlinear Dynamics and Unknown Disturbances Design and Experiments . IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II Express Briefs . 69 1 114 118. doi  10.1109TCSII.2021.3074705 . ISSN 15497747 .  Automated Vehicles for Safety  NHTSA . www.nhtsa.gov . Retrieved 21 November 2021 .  Path to Autonomy SelfDriving Car Levels 0 to 5 Explained . Car and Driver October 2017.  Taxonomy and Definitions for Terms Related to Driving Automation Systems for OnRoad Motor Vehicles . SAE International . 15 June 2018 . Retrieved 30 July 2019 .  J3016_202104 Taxonomy and Definitions for Terms Related to Driving Automation Systems for OnRoad Motor Vehicles  SAE International .  a b Van Brummelen Jessica OBrien Marie Gruyer Dominique Najjaran Homayoun April 2018. Autonomous vehicle perception The technology of today and tomorrow. Transportation Research Part C Emerging Technologies . 89  384 406. doi  10.1016j.trc.2018.02.012 .  Song Haina Zhou Shengpei Chang Zhenting Su Yuejiang Liu Xiaosong Yang Jingfeng 1 January 2021. Collaborative processing and data optimization of environmental perception technologies for autonomous vehicles . Assembly Automation . 41 3 283 291. doi  10.1108AA0120210007 . ISSN 01445154 .  a b Adnan Nadia Md Nordin Shahrina bin Bahruddin Mohamad Ariff Ali Murad December 2018. How trust can drive forward the user acceptance to the technology Invehicle technology for autonomous vehicle. Transportation Research Part A Policy and Practice . 118  819 836. doi  10.1016j.tra.2018.10.019 . S2CID 158645252 .  HD Maps vs AV Maps  The Crucial Differences . Mobileye . 28 February 2021.  Wigley Edward Rose Gillian 2 April 2020. Whos behind the wheel Visioning the future users and urban contexts of connected and autonomous vehicle technologies PDF . Geografiska Annaler Series B Human Geography . 102 2 155 171. doi  10.108004353684.2020.1747943 . S2CID 219087578 .  EPRS Automated vehicles in the EU Members Research Service Page 2 of 12 Glossary httpswww.europarl.europa.euRegDataetudesBRIE2016573902EPRS_BRI2016573902_EN.pdf  AAA Studies Technology Behind SelfDriving Cars . Your AAA Network . 18 February 2019. Archived from the original on 20 June 2021 . Retrieved 21 February 2020 .  The SARTRE project . Archived from the original on 27 November 2010.  Marshall Aarian. After a Deadly Crash Uber Returns Robocars to the Road . Wired . ISSN 10591028 . Retrieved 5 May 2023 .  Uber SelfDriving Cars Hit The Streets Of Pittsburgh . www.cbsnews.com . 14 September 2016 . Retrieved 5 May 2023 .  Californias first driverless bus hits the road in San Ramon . ABC7 San Francisco . Retrieved 5 May 2023 .  Mearian Lucas 19 August 2016. Ford remains wary of Teslalike autonomous driving features . Computer World . Retrieved 9 December 2016 .  a b Automated Vehicle Technology. King Coal Highway 292 2014 2329.  a b A Tragic Loss . Tesla . 30 June 2016 . Retrieved 10 December 2016 .  Hallerbach Sven Xia Yiqun Eberle Ulrich Koester Frank 3 April 2018. SimulationBased Identification of Critical Scenarios for Cooperative and Automated Vehicles. SAE International Journal of Connected and Automated Vehicles . 1 2 93 106. doi  10.42712018011066 .  Yigitcanlar Wilson Kamruzzaman 24 April 2019. Disruptive Impacts of Automated Driving Systems on the Built Environment and Land Use An Urban Planners Perspective . Journal of Open Innovation Technology Market and Complexity . 5 2 24. doi  10.3390joitmc5020024 .  a b c Anderson Mark May 2020. The road ahead for selfdriving cars The AV industry has had to reset expectations as it shifts its focus to level 4 autonomy  News. IEEE Spectrum . 57 5 8 9. doi  10.1109MSPEC.2020.9078402 . S2CID 219070930 .  a b c Campbell Mark Egerstedt Magnus How Jonathan P. Murray Richard M. 13 October 2010. Autonomous driving in urban environments approaches lessons and challenges. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A Mathematical Physical and Engineering Sciences . 368 1928 4649 4672. Bibcode  2010RSPTA.368.4649C . doi  10.1098rsta.2010.0110 . PMID 20819826 . S2CID 17558587 .  a b c d e Panagiotopoulos Ilias Dimitrakopoulos George October 2018. An empirical investigation on consumers intentions towards autonomous driving. Transportation Research Part C Emerging Technologies . 95  773 784. doi  10.1016j.trc.2018.08.013 . S2CID 117555199 .  Shladover Steven E. Nowakowski Christopher April 2019. Regulatory challenges for road vehicle automation Lessons from the California experience. Transportation Research Part A Policy and Practice . 122  125 133. doi  10.1016j.tra.2017.10.006 . S2CID 113811906 .  Umar Zakir Abdul Hamid et al. 2021. Adopting Aviation Safety Knowledge into the Discussions of Safe Implementation of Connected and Autonomous Road Vehicles . SAE Technical Papers SAE WCX Digital Summit 2021010074 . Retrieved 12 April 2021 .  Amendment proposal to the 1968 Convention on Road Traffic PDF . Economic Commission for Europe. March 2020 . Retrieved 13 November 2021 .  Explanatory memorandum Proposal of Amendment to Article 1 and new Article 34 BIS of the 1968 Convention on Road Traffic .  a b SMMT publishes guiding principles for marketing automated vehicles SMMT 22 November 2021  Driverless robot buses crash . Wolfstad.com. 6 December 2005 . Retrieved 20 November 2011 .  Driverless robot buses crash Part 2 . Wolfstad.com. 17 December 2005 . Retrieved 20 November 2011 .  SP Global Homepage  SP Global .  Vauxhall Vectra  Auto Express News  News . Auto Express . 29 November 2005 . Retrieved 20 November 2011 .  Nissan  News Press Release . Nissanglobal.com. 15 March 2006. Archived from the original on 27 October 2011 . Retrieved 20 November 2011 .  Singapores driverless vehicle ambitions reach next milestone with new national standards . Channel NewsAsia . Archived from the original on 2 February 2019 . Retrieved 2 February 2019 .  EU SUSTAINABLE ENERGY WEEK 1822 JUNE 2012 PDF . p. 14 . Retrieved 21 June 2021 .  Final Report Summary  CITYMOBIL2 Cities demonstrating cybernetic mobility . 11 November 2016 . Retrieved 17 August 2021 .  Experiments on autonomous and automated driving an overview 2015 PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 4 June 2022 . Retrieved 28 June 2021 .  Kitchen Sebastian 8 December 2016. JTA recommends replacing Skyway with driverless vehicles creating corridor from Riverside to EverBank Field . Florida TimesUnion . Retrieved 25 January 2017 .  JTA Board Chair Embraces Autonomous Vehicles To Replace Skyway . 15 April 2021 . Retrieved 10 June 2021 .  Introducing the worlds first completely unattended public autonomous vehicle . Euro Transport Magazine . 20 February 2017 . Retrieved 1 September 2017 .  Rivium 3rd generation . 12 August 2020 . Retrieved 10 June 2021 .  Baidu just made its 100th autonomous bus ahead of commercial launch in China . Tech Crunch. 4 July 2018 . Retrieved 14 July 2021 .  Top 25 autonomous shuttle manufacturers . 15 October 2020.  Toyota Unveils Their ePalette SelfDriving Shuttles . Retrieved 28 June 2021 .  Toyota ePalette autonomous vehicles to be rolled out within the next few years  . caradvice. 11 February 2021 . Retrieved 28 June 2021 .  China Autonomous Shuttle Market Report 2021 Featuring 10 Chinese Companies  5 International Companies . 21 April 2021 . Retrieved 28 June 2021 .  a b Yutong has already delivered 100 autonomous microbuses Xiaoyu 2.0 models to Zhengzhou . YouTube . Archived from the original on 14 December 2021 . Retrieved 14 July 2021 .  Walkabout The Worlds Largest Bus Factory Yutong Industrial Park . YouTube . Archived from the original on 14 December 2021 . Retrieved 14 July 2021 .  Autonomous Shuttle Pilots in Europe AMD Aspirations in Austin . 3 June 2021 . Retrieved 10 June 2021 .  BESTMILE AND TRAPEZE JOIN FORCES TO BRING AUTONOMOUS MOBILITY TO CITIES ALL AROUND THE GLOBE . Motion Digest Network . 10 October 2016 . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .  Swiss move on with selfdriving buses . swissinfo.ch . 5 October 2021 . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .  Washington D.C. residents can ride in this adorable driverless shuttle starting this summer . Business Insider . 16 June 2016 . Retrieved 5 October 2017 .  Autonomous shuttle Olli deployed in Turin Italy JAN 17 2020  Scott Mark 28 May 2017. The Future of European Transit Driverless and Utilitarian . The New York Times . Retrieved 8 September 2017 .  Las Vegas launches driverless shuttle bus test run on public roads . 12 January 2017 . Retrieved 1 September 2017 .  Driverless bus takes to the road in Perth . The Australian . 1 September 2016 . Retrieved 1 September 2017 .  Navya driverless shuttles to begin ferrying University of Michigan students this fall . Tech Crunch . 21 June 2017 . Retrieved 1 September 2017 .  Experimentations with Navyas Autonomous Shuttles . Retrieved 28 June 2021 .  HITCHING A RIDE Project looks to bring autonomous shuttles to Texas AM campus . The Eagle . 24 August 2017 . Retrieved 5 September 2017 .  Autonomous Shuttle . Unmanned Systems Lab Texas AM University . Retrieved 5 September 2017 .  Catch A Ride On TTIs Autonomous Shuttle . 17 September 2019 . Retrieved 28 June 2021 .  Driverless robot pods take to the Cambridge guided busway . 18 October 2017 . Retrieved 24 October 2017 .  Driverless Bus TESTING ROUTE NOTICE . Northern Territory Government. 5 September 2017. Archived from the original on 12 September 2017 . Retrieved 12 September 2017 .  Easymile  Driverless shuttle for the last mile . Archived from the original on 1 September 2017 . Retrieved 1 September 2017 .  Society Driverless bus test in Taipei gets positive feedback . Focus Taiwan News Channel. 5 August 2017 . Retrieved 1 September 2017 .  Denvers first driverless shuttle hits the test track avoids tumbleweed before possible 2018 launch . 4 December 2017 . Retrieved 7 December 2017 .  U.S. agency suspends selfdriving shuttle EasyMile use in 10 U.S. states . 25 February 2020  via www.reuters.com.   This is our future Fairfax tests regions first selfdriving shuttle for public transit . 17 August 2020 . Retrieved 28 June 2021 .  Transdev partners with Fairfax County to launch connected AV pilot project . Retrieved 28 June 2021 .  Nations largest fleet of autonomous electric shuttles launches in Colorado . Mass Transit. 13 August 2021 . Retrieved 13 August 2021 .  The Mines Rover . YouTube . Archived from the original on 14 December 2021 . Retrieved 13 August 2021 .  France approves fully autonomous bus for driving on public roads in a European first . Euronews . 2 December 2021 . Retrieved 3 December 2021 .  EasyMile First Authorized at Level 4 of Autonomous Driving on Public Roads . EasyMile Press release. 22 November 2021 . Retrieved 3 December 2021 .  GATEway Project . Retrieved 28 June 2021 .  Westfield Technology Group autonomous POD confirmed for Fleet Live 2019 . 1 August 2019. Archived from the original on 28 June 2021 . Retrieved 28 June 2021 .  Dubai tests the worlds first autonomous mobility pods . 15 February 2018 . Retrieved 25 February 2018 .  Baidu apollo self driving cars . Business Insider . 2 July 2017 . Retrieved 12 November 2018 .  Baidu starts mass production of autonomous buses . Deutche World. 5 July 2018 . Retrieved 12 November 2018 .  Baidus Robin Li Reveals Unmanned Bus AI Chip Digital Assistant Upgrade at Tech Summit . Yicai Global. 4 July 2018. Archived from the original on 12 November 2018 . Retrieved 12 November 2018 .  JTA FSCJ execute agreement for autonomous vehicle testing and educational initiatives . Mass Transit. 5 June 2020 . Retrieved 28 June 2021 .  JTA Receives 6th Autonomous U2C Program Test Vehicle FSCJ Part Of Latest Test . WJCT. 15 September 2020 . Retrieved 28 June 2021 .  Olli 2.0 joins JTAs U2C testing program . Jacksonville Daily Record. 16 September 2020 . Retrieved 28 June 2021 .  JTA testing ADA accessible autonomous vehicle . Mass Transit. 5 November 2019 . Retrieved 28 June 2021 .  JTA Unveils U²C Gen2 Test Vehicle . Archived from the original on 28 June 2021 . Retrieved 28 June 2021 .  Selfdriving people mover makes its maiden trip at brussels airport . 13 May 2019 . Retrieved 28 June 2021 .  NTU Singapore to test autonomous vehicles on the NTU Smart Campus . Retrieved 28 June 2021 .  NEWS New Zealands first autonomous shuttle debuts at Christchurch Airport . Retrieved 28 June 2021 .  Autonomous shuttle rides for Christchurch public to park the fear factor . 16 February 2020 . Retrieved 28 June 2021 .  Yutong 5GEnabled Intelligent Mobility Solution Live Show . Retrieved 14 July 2021 .  Riding an Autonomous Bus ON THE CITY STREETS in China Xiaoyu 2.0 . YouTube . Archived from the original on 14 December 2021 . Retrieved 14 July 2021 .  Taiwans first autonomous minibus begins operations in Changhua . Taiwan Today. 16 July 2020 . Retrieved 27 November 2021 .  First Homegrown Autonomous Shuttle Wins Operating License in Taiwan . Auto Future. 11 January 2021 . Retrieved 27 November 2021 .  Test Operation of Remote Controlled Driverless Autonomous Driving Mobility Services to Start . METI Japan . 11 December 2020 . Retrieved 23 November 2021 .  Shin Kato November 2021. AISTs efforts toward social implementation of automated driving mobility services PDF . SIPadus . pp. 5 13 . Retrieved 23 November 2021 .  国内初自動運転車に対するレベル4の認可を取得しました Domestically the first Approved as Level 4 selfdriving car. METI Japan . 31 March 2023 . Retrieved 3 April 2023 .  Chinese autonomous driving startup WeRide launches Mini Robobus in Guangzhou . 29 January 2021 . Retrieved 28 June 2021 .  Covid Wont Stop The Olympics Nor Toyotas Autonomous EV Transportation For Athletes . Forbes . 30 June 2021 . Retrieved 13 August 2021 .  Toyota halts all selfdriving ePalette vehicles after Olympic village accident . Reuters. 28 August 2021 . Retrieved 29 August 2021 .  Toyota selfdriving buses in Paralympic village to restart on Aug. 31 . Kyodo News . 30 August 2021 . Retrieved 17 November 2021 .  東京の西新宿と臨海副都心で自動運転移動サービスへ 都が実証実験の実施を決定 Tokyo Metropolitan Government decided to conduct trials on autonomous mobility services in westShinjyuku area and bayfront area. Response in Japanese. 19 July 2021 . Retrieved 2 December 2021 .  Selfdriving shuttle buses hit the streets of Stockholm . New Atlas. 25 January 2018.  Smart Mobility is here  via www.youtube.com.  Selfdriving buses are being tested in China and theyre the largest of their kind yet . Mashable. 4 December 2017.  UKs first driverless bus trialled in Manchester . Independent.co.uk . 19 March 2019. Archived from the original on 11 August 2022.  First driverless Edinburgh to Fife bus trial announced . BBC News . 22 November 2018.  Peat Chris 23 January 2023. First passengers board Stagecoach autonomous bus . Bus  Coach Buyer . Retrieved 24 January 2023 .  Peat Chris 23 January 2023. Autonomous bus starts trials in Oxfordshire . Bus  Coach Buyer . Retrieved 24 January 2023 .  UKs first selfdriving electric bus unveiled . Oxford Mail . 23 January 2023 . Retrieved 23 January 2023 .  Public Road Demonstration Tests of MidSized Buses with Autonomous Driving Systems to be Launched . METI Japan . 10 July 2020 . Retrieved 20 November 2021 .  The Isuzu Group Value Creation Story Growth Strategies PDF . Isuzu . 10 July 2020. p. 26 . Retrieved 20 November 2021 .  Shin Kato 2021  pp. 34.  Hübner Irina. Neuronale Netze und selbstlernende KI MaplessAutonomousFahrlösung für Busse . Elektroniknet in German . Retrieved 31 January 2024 .  Suncor Seeks Cost Cutting With Robot Trucks in OilSands Mine . Bloomberg.com . 13 October 2013 . Retrieved 14 June 2016 .  HS Clarifies Autonomous Vehicle Sales Forecast  Expects 21 Million Sales Globally in the Year 2035 and Nearly 76 Million Sold Globally Through 2035 . ihs.com. 9 June 2016 . Retrieved 14 June 2016 .  Nelson Ray June 1995. Leave The Driving To Us . Popular Science . p. 26.  Gingrich Newt 7 October 2014. Breakout Pioneers of the Future Prison Guards of the Past and the Epic Battle That Will Decide Americas Fate . Regnery Publishing. p. 114. ISBN 9781621572817 .  Transportation invests for a new future Automation is rapidly accelerating and disrupting the industry PDF .  Waymos selfdriving trucks will start delivering freight in Atlanta . The Verge . Retrieved 13 March 2018 .  Ubers SelfDriving Truck Makes Its First Delivery 50000 Budweisers . WIRED . Retrieved 13 March 2018 .  Colorado officer recounts how Ottos autonomous beer delivery became a reality . Fleet Owner . 9 March 2018 . Retrieved 13 March 2018 .  Dillet Romain. Uber acquires Otto to lead Ubers selfdriving car effort . TechCrunch . Retrieved 13 March 2018 .  McFarland Matt 26 March 2018. First selfdrive train launched on mainline track . Telegraph .  Kolodny Lora 6 February 2018. A selfdriving truck just drove from Los Angeles to Jacksonville . CNBC . Retrieved 13 March 2018 .  A SelfDriving Truck Might Deliver Your Next Refrigerator . WIRED . Retrieved 13 March 2018 .  Exclusive Tesla developing selfdriving tech for semitruck wants to test in Nevada . Reuters . 10 August 2017 . Retrieved 8 September 2017 .  Silicon Valleys Levandowski returns with selfdriving truck startup . Financial Times . 18 December 2018. Archived from the original on 11 December 2022 . Retrieved 10 May 2019 .  a b Eric Adams 6 January 2017 Hondas selfbalancing motorcycle is perfect for noobs  Wired  Selfbalancing Yamaha motorcycle comes on command  Agence FrancePresse 12 January 2018  via IOL  Bob Sorokanich 11 September 2018 Robots replace humans the one place we least expected motorcycles  Road and Track  a b HarleyDavidson Wants To Make SelfBalancing Motorcycles By Putting A Gyroscope In Your Top Case . Jalopnik . 9 June 2020 . Retrieved 4 August 2020 .  Sorokanich Bob 11 September 2018. Robots Replace Humans the One Place We Least Expected Motorcycles . Road  Track . Retrieved 4 August 2020 .  Selfbalancing Yamaha motorcycle comes on command . www.iol.co.za . Retrieved 4 August 2020 .  枝久保達也 25 January 2021. 世界初の完全自動無人運転ポートライナーが40年前に開業した理由 . diamond.jp in Japanese. Diamond . Retrieved 23 January 2022 .  Topham Gwyn 26 March 2018. First selfdriving train launches on London Thameslink route . The Guardian .  Germany launches worlds first autonomous tram in Potsdam . TheGuardian.com . 23 September 2018.  a b Lee Jason 23 December 2019. 3 Companies Looking to Dominate Drone Delivery . The Motley Fool . Retrieved 4 August 2020 .  Toyota Tsusho Launches Drone Delivery of Medical and Pharmaceutical Supplies Business in Nagasaki Prefectures Goto Islands  Network Powered by Zipline . Toyota Tsusho . Retrieved 21 May 2022 .  International Commercial Drone Regulation and Drone Delivery Services PDF . RAND .  Bill S. 1405 PDF .  Products . Sea Machines . Retrieved 4 August 2020 .  a b c Autonomous Boats Will Be On the Market Sooner Than SelfDriving Cars . www.vice.com . Retrieved 4 August 2020 .  Forget RoboCars and Hit the Water on an Autonomous Boat . Wired . ISSN 10591028 . Retrieved 24 December 2020 .  Self Driving Water Taxis Buffalo Automation speaks to our Inventive Past . Buffalo Rising . 12 May 2020 . Retrieved 4 August 2020 .  DATAMARAN AF . Autonomous Marine Systems . Retrieved 4 August 2020 .  Shead Sam 11 September 2020. Testing begins on an autonomous Mayflower ship ahead of its Atlantic voyage . CNBC . Retrieved 24 December 2020 .  This Engineer Is Building an Armada of Saildrones That Could Remake Weather Forecasting . Bloomberg.com . 15 May 2018 . Retrieved 24 December 2020 .  Home  Boston Dynamics . www.bostondynamics.com . Retrieved 4 August 2020 .  a b Rules on safe use of automated vehicles on GB roads . GOV.UK .  a b Liljamo Timo Liimatainen Heikki Pöllänen Markus November 2018. Attitudes and concerns on automated vehicles. Transportation Research Part F Traffic Psychology and Behaviour . 59  24 44. doi  10.1016j.trf.2018.08.010 . S2CID 150232489 .  a b Despite Autonomous Vehicle Intrigue Americans Still Crave Control Behind The Wheel According To New Kelley Blue Book Study Press release. Kelley Blue Book. 28 September 2016. ProQuest 1825236192 .  a b c d Users Understanding of Automated Vehicles and Perception to Improve Traffic Safety Results from a National Survey . AAA Foundation . 17 December 2019 . Retrieved 4 August 2020 .  Wang Song Li Zhixia 28 March 2019. Exploring the mechanism of crashes with automated vehicles using statistical modeling approaches . PLOS ONE . 14 3 e0214550. Bibcode  2019PLoSO..1414550W . doi  10.1371journal.pone.0214550 . PMC 6438496 . PMID 30921396 .  a b Ainsalu Jaagup Arffman Ville Bellone Mauro Ellner Maximilian Haapamäki Taina Haavisto Noora Josefson Ebba Ismailogullari Azat Lee Bob Madland Olav Madžulis Raitis Müür Jaanus Mäkinen Sami Nousiainen Ville PilliSihvola Eetu Rutanen Eetu Sahala Sami Schønfeldt Boris Smolnicki Piotr Marek Soe RalfMartin Sääski Juha Szymańska Magdalena Vaskinn Ingar Åman Milla 2018. State of the Art of Automated Buses . Sustainability . 10 9 3118. doi  10.3390su10093118 .  Collision Between Vehicle Controlled by Developmental Automated Driving System and Pedestrian . National Transportation Safety Board . 28 March 2018 . Retrieved 19 February 2023 .  a b c Dogan E Chatila R 2016. Ethics in the design of automated vehicles the AVEthics project PDF . CEUR Workshop Proceedings .  a b c How Should Autonomous Vehicles Make Moral Decisions Machine Ethics Artificial Driving Intelligence and Crash Algorithms. Contemporary Readings in Law and Social Justice . 11  9. 2019. doi  10.22381CRLSJ11120191 inactive 1 November 2024. S2CID 213759514 . ProQuest 2269349615 .  cite journal    CS1 maint DOI inactive as of November 2024  link   a b The Safety and Reliability of Networked Autonomous Vehicles Ethical Dilemmas Liability Litigation Concerns and Regulatory Issues. Contemporary Readings in Law and Social Justice . 11 2 9. 2019. doi  10.22381CRLSJ11220191 . ProQuest 2322893910 .  Umbrello Steven Yampolskiy Roman V. 15 May 2021. Designing AI for Explainability and Verifiability A Value Sensitive Design Approach to Avoid Artificial Stupidity in Autonomous Vehicles . International Journal of Social Robotics . 14 2 313 322. doi  10.1007s1236902100790w . hdl  23181788856 . ISSN 18754805 . S2CID 236584241 . Uber SelfDriving Cars Hit The Streets Of Pittsburgh . www.cbsnews.com . 14 September 2016 . Retrieved 5 May 2023 . External links  edit  European Commission Intelligent Car website U.S. Department of Transportation  Intelligent Transportation Systems Joint Program Office website Sheth Aadit 3 January 2024. Indian AI And Robotics Startup Claims Level 5 Autonomy . Prompt Engineering Daily . Retrieved 27 January 2024 .